

--- PAGE 1 ---
SpaceScienceReviews          (2024) 220:51 
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11214-024-01072-3
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding:Oceanto
Near-Surface(REASON)
DonaldD.Blankenship ·AlinaMoussessian ·ElaineChapin ·DuncanA.Young ·
G.WesleyPatterson ·JeffreyJ.Plautetal. [fullauthordetailsattheendofthearticle]
Received:1August2023/Accepted:29April2024
©TheAuthor(s)2024
Abstract
The Radar for Europa Assessment and Sounding: Ocean to Near-surface (REASON) is a
dual-frequency ice-penetrating radar (9 and 60 MHz) onboard the Europa Clipper mission.
REASON is designed to probe Europa from exosphere to subsurface ocean, contributing the
third dimension to observations of this enigmatic world. The hypotheses REASON will test
are that (1) the ice shell of Europa hosts liquid water, (2) the ice shell overlies an ocean and is
subject to tidal ﬂexing, and (3) the exosphere, near-surface, ice shell, and ocean participate
in material exchange essential to the habitability of this moon. REASON will investigate
processes governing this material exchange by characterizing the distribution of putative
non-ice material (e.g., brines, salts) in the subsurface, searching for an ice–ocean interface,
characterizing the ice shell’s global structure, and constraining the amplitude of Europa’s
radial tidal deformations. REASON will accomplish these science objectives using a com-
bination of radar measurement techniques including altimetry, reﬂectometry, sounding, in-
terferometry, plasma characterization,a n dranging. Building on a rich heritage from Earth,
the moon, and Mars, REASON will be the ﬁrst ice-penetrating radar to explore the outer so-
lar system. Because these radars are untested for the icy worlds in the outer solar system, a
novel approach to measurement quality assessment was developed to represent uncertainties
in key properties of Europa that affect REASON performance and ensure robustness across
a range of plausible parameters suggested for the icy moon. REASON will shed light on a
never-before-seen dimension of Europa and – in concert with other instruments on Europa
Clipper – help to investigate whether Europa is a habitable world.
Keywords Europa · Ice shell · Ice-penetrating radar · Europa Clipper
1I n t r o d u c t i o n
1.1 EuropaClipperSummaryandScienceMotivationforREASON
The icy landforms of Europa, some familiar and others enigmatic and unique in the Solar
System, indicate a complex and recently ( ≲100 Myr) active history for its ice shell (Bier-
haus et al. 2009; Doggett et al. 2009; Kattenhorn and Hurford 2009). The formation of these
Europa Clipper: A Mission to Explore Ocean World Habitability
Edited by Haje Korth, Bonnie J. Buratti and David Senske



--- PAGE 2 ---
   51 Page2of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
landforms, as well as the nature of the ice shell and character of the deep interior, have been
driven by the analysis of data acquired during the V oyager 1 and 2 spacecraft encounters
with Jupiter (1979) and the Galileo mission (1995–2003) (Alexander et al. 2009). These
data include direct measurements in two dimensions of Europa’s surface (e.g., imaging and
spectroscopy) and indirect measurements in a single dimension of Europa’s global subsur-
face properties (e.g., radio science and magnetometry).
In particular, analyses of these data have provided insights into the subsurface domains
within and bounding Europa’s ice shell. Key among these insights was the presence of a
global ocean hidden beneath the ice shell, inferred from the Galileo magnetometer data,
(Carr et al. 1998; Khurana et al. 1998; Pappalardo et al. 1999;K i v e l s o ne ta l .2000)a n d
a rocky mantle of unknown complexity, inferred from radio science data (Anderson et al.
1998). However, direct measurements of the near-surface (i.e., the upper few hundred me-
ters) and subsurface of Europa’s ice shell, including its properties, structure, and bounding
interfaces, are required to address the daunting framework of working hypotheses arising
from interpretations of previous V oyager and Galileo mission data.
The key example of this are the many working hypotheses for the exchange of material
between the surface and subsurface, and their implications for habitability,
1 which made Eu-
ropa a top candidate for exploration in both the 2003 and 2011 Planetary Decadal Surveys
(National Research Council 2003, 2011). Assessing Europa’s potential for habitability re-
quires understanding the structure and evolution of its ice shell as well as its coupling to the
ocean/rocky mantle system and exosphere. The Radar for Europa Assessment and Sound-
ing: Ocean to Near-surface (REASON) is designed to operate in conjunction with other
investigations on Europa Clipper to accomplish this objective (see Pappalardo et al. 2024,
this collection). REASON is an ice-penetrating radar
2 optimized to probe Europa from its
exosphere to its subsurface ocean. If successful, the REASON investigations will revolu-
tionize our understanding of Europa’s ice shell by providing the ﬁrst direct measurements
of the structure and properties of these subsurface domains and their bounding interfaces
at scales critical for understanding exchange processes that govern Europa’s potential for
habitability.
REASON baseline science investigations of Europa require four types of measurement
techniques: radar altimetry to determine surface topography, radar reﬂectometry to study
surface roughness and near-surface
3 structure and composition as well as radar sounding to
probe both the shallow and full depth subsurface domains of the ice shell coupled with radar
interferometry to discriminate nadir subsurface features from radar returns of cross-track
surface features. Two additional measurement techniques, radarplasma characterization (to
1Habitability in this context refers to the conditions necessary to support life as we know it (see Vance et al.
2023, this collection).
2Here we use the terms radar sounder and ice-penetrating radar to refer speciﬁcally to pulse radar systems on
airborne or space-based platforms (Schlegel et al.2022). Radar sounder is the term typically used in planetary
radioglaciology, whereas Radio Echo Sounder (RES) and ice-penetrating radar are terms commonly used in
terrestrial radioglaciology.
3Formally, near-surface refers to depths <300 m, shallow subsurface refers to depths ≤3 km, and full depth
subsurface refers to depths from the surface to ≤30 km. The shallow and full depth subsurface depths are
deﬁned consistent with the thin and thick ice shell modes described in Sect.4.2.6. The near-surface is deﬁned
as the region close to the surface where subsurface structure cannot be directly resolved by the radar (i.e., the
vertical resolution). In practice, the vertical resolution is governed by the bandwidth, windowing function,
and dielectric properties of the material; however, here we adopt the required HF vertical resolution in ice as
a conservative upper bound (Table2).


--- PAGE 3 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page3of91    51 
derive the total electron content (TEC) in the ionosphere) and radar ranging4 (to measure
the differential range between the spacecraft and the surface through time at groundtrack
crossover points) provide, respectively, a critical framework for understanding the boundary
conditions for surface/near-surface exchange and the energetics of tidal deformation across
the ice shell’s full breadth and depth.
1.2 RadarSounding(andAssessment)ofIcefromtheInnertotheOuterSolar
System
Radar sounding refers to a technique where electromagnetic energy is directed and transmit-
ted into the subsurface, producing reﬂections which are recorded as signals. This is distinct
from side-looking imaging radars, where energy is directed and transmitted off-nadir and
backscattered energy is recorded as signal. Consequently, smooth topographic features that
are highly reﬂective and specular are “bright” (i.e., high signal-to-noise ratio, SNR) in radar
sounding data and “dark” (i.e., low SNR) in imaging radar data. Ice penetrating radars have
the unique capability to penetrate deep into the subsurface of icy bodies due to the high
transparency of ice at MHz frequencies (Warren 1984; Blankenship et al. 2009;K o f m a n
et al. 2010; Pettinelli et al. 2015). As these transmitted radio waves travel through the sub-
surface, their reﬂections, referred to as “returns” or “echoes”, vary in power and character
as they interact with subsurface horizons and structures that are associated with dielectric
contrasts (i.e., changes in their relative dielectric permittivity
5). A critical consideration for
radar studies of icy worlds across the solar system is the leverage provided by the thermo-
physical transformation of ice to water, which is characterized by a contrast in permittivity
of over an order of magnitude.
From its early origins measuring the thickness of glaciers and the extent of ﬂoating ice
shelves on Earth, ice penetrating radar has proven to be a versatile geophysical technique
used to constrain the presence of sub-ice water (e.g., water channels, lakes, ocean incur-
sion), properties of the entire ice column (e.g., porosity, thermal state, composition), basal
conditions (e.g., frozen vs. thawed, ﬂoating vs grounded ice, topographic heterogeneity),
and ice dynamics (e.g., variations in accumulation/melting and ﬂow/fracture) (Schroeder
et al. 2020). Application of radar sounding as a ground based and airborne geophysical
technique has been extended to orbital studies of bodies beyond Earth, with extensive cov-
erage of the Moon (Porcello et al. 1974) and Mars (Picardi et al. 2004; Seu et al. 2007;
Jordan et al. 2009). Multiple mission concepts to study the icy Galilean moons of Jupiter
have highlighted subsurface sounding of the ice as a necessary technique for accomplishing
proposed science goals (Greely and Johnson 2004) or explicitly included ice-penetrating
radar as part of the model payload (Ludwinski et al. 1998; Clark et al. 2009; Lewis et al.
2016). For Europa in particular, early feasibility studies supported radar sounding with an
ice penetrating radar as capable of characterizing the three-dimensional distribution of sub-
surface water, including the potential detection of a subsurface ocean (Chyba et al. 1998;
Blankenship et al. 1999). Ultimately, these early mission concepts evolved into the National
Aeronautics and Space Administration (NASA) Europa Clipper mission (Brown 2021)a n d
the European Space Agency (ESA) JUpiter ICy moons Explorer (JUICE) mission (Grasset
4REASON’s ranging measurement technique should not be confused with ranging as used by Gravity/Radio
Science (see Mazarico et al. 2023, this collection). The term ranging was adopted to distinguish the measure-
ment technique from altimetry.
5Permittivity is a complex quantity which describes the polarizability of a material (i.e., energy storage and
dissipation in response to an applied electromagnetic ﬁeld) (Sihvola 1999).


--- PAGE 4 ---
   51 Page4of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
Fig. 1 Radargram generated from ice-penetrating radar data collected over Totten Ice Shelf, Antarctica
(TOT/JKB2d/X16a) modiﬁed from Lindzey (2015)
et al. 2013), both of which include ice penetrating radars. The radar data collected in the
Jovian system by REASON on Europa Clipper and by the Radar for Icy Moons Exploration
(RIME) on JUICE (Bruzzone et al. 2013) will mark the ultimate extension of our capacity
for radar sounding and assessment of ice from the inner to the outer Solar System.
1.3 Earth’sCryosphere
Radar sounding and assessment of Earth’s cryosphere represents the foundation from which
planetary radioglaciology has been and will continue to be built. As such, terrestrial data
sets, analysis techniques, and confounding factors represent critical historical context for
interpreting future radar sounding data collected on other worlds.
Radar surveys of the terrestrial cryosphere, both ﬂoating and grounded (Fig. 1), were
originally pursued to generate maps of ice thickness and surface/basal topography (Bailey
et al. 1964; Gudmandsen 1969) – an effort that continues to date (Lythe and Vaughan2001;
Fretwell et al. 2013; Frémand et al. 2023). Surveys in recent decades have expanded their
scope from identiﬁcation to characterization of the bed (Schroeder et al.2020 and references
therein), where bed characteristics are typically quantiﬁed using the power of the basal return
(Peters et al.2005b; Christianson et al.2016; Chu et al.2021). Radar sounding data are often
visualized using radargrams (Fig. 1), which display the power of the return as a function
of travel time (fast time) on the vertical axis and along-track distance (slow time) on the
horizontal axis.
On Earth, radar altimetry proﬁles collected over ice have been an essential foundation
for understanding the evolution of our glaciers, ice sheets, and ice shelves (Rémy and
Parouty 2009; Fricker and Padman2012). These proﬁles, obtained by identifying the surface
echo and the associated delay, have long been used to quantify the basal stress regime for
grounded ice, which is a function of ice surface slope (Cooper et al. 1982; Bentley 1987).
Knowledge of the state of stress provides essential context for discriminating geologic fea-
tures within the ice and the hypothesized processes responsible for their formation (e.g.,
Blankenship et al. 2001). For ﬂoating ice, the detection of liquid water can be conﬁrmed by
comparing the projected ice thickness, derived from surface elevations measured by altime-
try, to the measured ice thickness, obtained directly by sounding (Jenkins and Doake 1991;
Fricker et al. 2001). An example of particular relevance to Europa are ﬂoating icebergs (Pe-
ters et al. 2007b). As illustrated in Fig. 2, ﬂoating icebergs will protrude above the surface


--- PAGE 5 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page5of91    51 
Fig.2 Radargram generated
from ice-penetrating radar data
collected over iceberg B15,
Antarctica
(MCM/SJB2/BERG04c;
Blankenship, personal
communication)
Fig. 3 Near-surface properties of McMurdo Ice Shelf, Antarctica derived from ice-penetrating radar data,
modiﬁed from Grima et al. (2016)
by ∼ 10% of the total ice thickness due to the ∼ 10% difference in densities of water and ice
(∼ 1000 and 920 kg/m3, respectively).
In addition, assessment of near-surface properties has become increasingly important for
Earth’s cryospheric systems as the thermal/mass exchange between the ice and our atmo-
sphere is increasingly perturbed (Humphrey et al. 2012; Machguth et al. 2016; Mortimer
et al. 2016). The embodiment and implications of these changes can contrast substantially
with the grounded and ﬂoating ice systems of Earth providing a broad diversity of con-
straints on ice accumulation and melting for its ice sheets and ice shelves. To understand
these complex and heterogeneous ice/water systems, statistical analyses of surface echo am-
plitude have been used to separate the reﬂected and scattered components of radar signals
of multiple frequencies to simultaneously obtain surface roughness and bulk permittivity
of the near-surface for both ﬂoating and grounded ice systems at multiple scales (Fig. 3)
(Grima et al. 2014a,b, 2016, 2017, 2019). It has also been possible to combine these multi-
ple frequency approaches with a careful assessment of frequency segments across the band


--- PAGE 6 ---
   51 Page6of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
Fig.4 Radargram generated from ice-penetrating radar data collected over iceberg B15, Antarctica showing
extensive surface and basal crevassing, modiﬁed from Peters et al. (2007b)
of a particular radar to constrain both the lateral and vertical heterogeneity of these bulk
near-surface properties (Chan et al. 2023b).
A great deal of the early airborne radar assessment and sounding of Earth’s cryosphere
was focused on its ice shelves (Fig. 1) (Vaughan et al. 1995). It was hypothesized over a
half century ago that instabilities in these ice shelves would be the primary trigger for rapid
draining of the substantial interior grounded ice reservoir for large segments of the Antarctic
ice sheet, causing sea level rise (Weertman1974; Mercer 1978). Mapping of both surface and
basal crevassing (Fig. 4) was an important element of this work with parallel studies of ice
shelf thickness. These analyses, which initially focused on qualitatively identifying regions
of clutter (Jezek et al. 1979; Jezek and Bentley 1983; Jezek 1984), have recently evolved
to more quantitative assessments of crevassing processes, including the discrimination of
water versus ice ﬁlled basal crevassing (Peters et al. 2007b). We anticipate that the arc of
radar studies of the icy worlds of the outer planets will follow a similar pattern in the shallow
subsurface, where brittle fracture might dominate.
An offshoot of the early radar sounding of Earth’s ice shelves, perhaps even more rele-
vant to icy ocean worlds, was the misinterpretation of the sub-ice ocean interface from radar
sounding over Filchner-Ronne Ice Shelf (Robin et al. 1983; Crabtree and Doake 1986).
When more precise ice surface altimetry became available, it was discovered that the “mea-
sured” thickness from radar sounding could not be reconciled with the new measurements of
surface elevation using Archimedes’ principle (Thyssen 1988). Subsequent drilling showed
unequivocally that the basal feature that was interpreted as the ice–ocean interface was in-
stead a boundary between the glacier-derived ﬂoating “meteoric ice” and saltier “marine
ice” frozen from the ocean below (Engelhardt and Determann 1987; Oerter et al. 1992),
as illustrated in Fig. 5. From that point on the radar altimetry and sounding observations
were combined to establish and map the thickness of the underplated marine ice to test vari-


--- PAGE 7 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page7of91    51 
Fig.5 Radargram generated from ice-penetrating radar data collected over Filchner-Ronne Ice Shelf, Antarc-
tica illustrating how a marine–meteoric ice interface could be mistaken as the ice–ocean interface, modiﬁed
from Thyssen (1988)
ous working hypotheses for the distribution of melting and freezing associated with sub-ice
ocean circulation (Fricker et al. 2001; Joughin and Vaughan 2004; Lambrecht et al. 2007).
For grounded ice sheets on Earth, radar sounding has also led to the discovery of a vast
inventory of subglacial lakes in both the Arctic and Antarctic (Livingstone et al. 2022).
Traditionally, this is accomplished by detecting regions that appear “brighter” than the sur-
rounding terrain (Carter et al. 2007; Ilisei et al. 2019). Again, surface altimetry serves as
an essential complementary data set to identify these subglacial lakes (Fig. 6). Ice thickness
estimates coupled with surface elevation measurements enable hydrostatic analysis to de-
termine whether ice over putative lakes is in hydrostatic equilibrium (Vaughan et al. 2007;
Ewert et al. 2012). Variations in ice surface topography through time can indicate drainage
and recharge of active subglacial lakes (Wingham et al. 2006; Siegfried and Fricker 2021).
Confounding interpretation, some subglacial lakes identiﬁed through altimetry do not ap-
pear radar-bright (Carter et al. 2007; Humbert et al. 2018; Lindzey et al. 2020). Ultimately
these anomalous subglacial lakes can only be unambiguously conﬁrmed through subglacial
drilling (Talalay 2012; Tulaczyk et al. 2014;P r i s c ue ta l .2021)o rs e i s m i cs u r v e y s( P e t e r s
et al. 2008; Woodward et al. 2010;H o r g a ne ta l .2012).
The pace of radar studies of Earth’s cryosphere is increasing rapidly, not only because of
the threat of its role in rapid sea level rise on Earth, but also because of the recognition of
the importance of potential ice-covered habitats hosted by both rock and water systems on
Earth for understanding habitability across the solar system. Great advances have recently


--- PAGE 8 ---
   51 Page8of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
Fig.6 Altimetry proﬁle (top) and radargram (bottom) generated from ice-penetrating radar and laser altime-
try data collected over Lake V ostok, Antarctica illustrating how complementary altimetry and radar sounding
data can support the identiﬁcation of subglacial lakes, modiﬁed from Blankenship et al. (2009)
been made in quantifying radar reﬂectivity and scattering in pursuit of understanding ex-
change processes for the surface/near-surface and full depth/water interface studies on Earth.
Reﬂectivity has often been considered synonymous with the Fresnel reﬂection coefﬁcient,
governed by the contrast in dielectric properties across an interface (Ulaby and Long 2015;
Christianson et al. 2016). However, the apparent reﬂectivity is also inﬂuenced by scattering
associated with the wavelength scale roughness of the surface and/or interface (Peters et al.
2005b; Campbell 2009;R i p p i ne ta l .2014) and properties of the subsurface ice, including
the presence of volume scatterers (Chu et al. 2018; Culberg and Schroeder 2020). Another
factor inﬂuencing reﬂectivity is the electrical conductivity, which is governed by the ther-
mal proﬁle within the ice column as well as the concentration of lattice soluble impurities
(Fujita et al. 2000; Moore 2000; MacGregor et al. 2007; Matsuoka et al. 2012; MacGregor
et al. 2015). Uncertainty in these factors challenges interpretation of radar data (Matsuoka
2011). Methods have been developed to deconvolve these factors, which include estimating
and correcting attenuation through the ice column (Ashmore et al. 2014; Hills et al. 2020),
leveraging the statistics of echo power over a region (Grima et al. 2014a), or examining the
properties of the return signal itself (Schroeder et al. 2014; Jordan et al. 2017). These novel
analysis techniques have enabled the mapping of ice shelf brines (Grima et al. 2016), im-
proved identiﬁcation of frozen vs. thawed beds (Jordan et al.2018;F r a n k ee ta l .2021), and,
most notably, the discovery of new subglacial aqueous systems as candidates for habitable
environments (Schroeder et al. 2013; Rutishauser et al. 2018, 2022).


--- PAGE 9 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page9of91    51 
1.4 FromtheMoontoMarsandBack
One of the earliest applications of radar sounding beyond Earth was the Apollo 17 Lunar
Sounder Experiment (ALSE), a multi-frequency imaging radar (5, 15, 150 MHz or 60, 20,
2 m) with a subsurface sounding requirement (Porcello et al.1974). The longer wavelengths
enabled deeper penetration into the lunar regolith, whereas the shorter wavelengths enabled
higher quality surface images and proﬁles. The primary science objective was the detection
of subsurface discontinuities (sounding) and three secondary science objectives were sur-
face imaging, surface proﬁling, and radio astronomy (i.e., measurement of galactic noise)
(Phillips et al. 1973; Porcello et al. 1974). Using the 5 MHz band, the ALSE produced el-
evation proﬁles of the Moon (Brown et al. 1974) and ultimately identiﬁed two reﬂectors
beneath Mare Serenitatis at depths of 0.9 km and 1.6 km and one reﬂector beneath Mare
Crisium at a depth of 1.4 km (Peeples et al. 1978).
After almost forty years, the ALSE was followed by the Mars Advanced Radar for Sub-
surface and Ionospheric Sounding (MARSIS) instrument ﬂown on ESA’s Mars Express mis-
sion (Picardi et al. 2004; Jordan et al. 2009). MARSIS is a dual-channel radar sounder oper-
ating between frequencies of 1.3 and 5.5 MHz for subsurface sounding and 0.1 and 5.5 MHz
for ionospheric sounding. The primary science objectives were to map the subsurface distri-
bution of water ice and liquid water, probe subsurface geology, characterize the surface, and
sound the ionosphere. The principal results of the ﬁrst decade of observation by MARSIS
are summarized in Orosei et al. ( 2015), including conﬁrming the hypothesis of a predomi-
nantly icy composition for the Polar Layered Deposits (Plaut et al.2007). Recent analyses of
MARSIS data collected over the South Polar Layered Deposits (SPLD) suggest the presence
of subglacial hypersaline bodies of water (Orosei et al.2018; Lauro et al. 2021, 2022); how-
ever, this interpretation has been the subject of intense debate (Sect. 9.1.2). MARSIS was
closely followed by the SHAllow RADar (SHARAD), a radar sounder ﬂown on NASA’s
Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter (MRO) designed to detect shallow subsurface interfaces (Seu
et al. 2004). SHARAD operates at a center frequency of 20 MHz and with a bandwidth
of 10 MHz. Major scientiﬁc ﬁndings derived from the ﬁrst nine years of SHARAD are
s u m m a r i z e di nC r o c ie ta l .(2011), including the discovery that many mid-latitude lobate
features are ice-rich, debris-covered glaciers (Holt et al.2008). At the poles, SHARAD data
revealed a highly complex and temporally-varying pattern of deposition and ablation/subli-
mation (Putzig et al. 2009; Smith et al. 2016; Campbell and Morgan 2018), and made the
revolutionary discovery of CO
2 ice deposits at the south pole trapped beneath a surface lag
and capable of doubling the current atmospheric pressure if released (Phillips et al. 2011).
Following MARSIS and SHARAD, Mars became the most globally well-characterized
body by ground-penetrating radar, and the target for new radar sounding data transitioned
back to the Moon. The goals of the Lunar Radar Sounder (LRS) ﬂown on JAXA’s SELeno-
logical and ENgineering Explorer (SELENE) were to map the subsurface structure of the
Moon to 5 km depth with a vertical resolution of 100 m by operating between 4 and 6 MHz
and to make passive observations of natural radio and plasma waves between 10 kHz and
30 MHz (Sasaki et al. 2003). Some key results from LRS are presented in Ono et al. (2010)
and include the discovery of numerous subsurface reﬂectors several hundred meters deep in
the nearside maria interpreted to be regolith interbedded with basaltic lava ﬂows.
1.5 HeritagefromExistingIce-PenetratingRadars
Technology has advanced signiﬁcantly since the ﬁrst radar soundings of glaciers (Stern
1930; Steenson 1951; Waite and Schmidt 1962; Turchetti et al. 2008). These early ob-
servations prompted the engineering of radar sounding systems dedicated to studying the


--- PAGE 10 ---
   51 Page10of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
Fig.7 Comparison between radargrams generated from ice-penetrating radar data collected over ice on Earth
at 60 MHz center frequency, 15 MHz bandwidth (top) and Mars at∼ 1 MHz center frequency and bandwidth
(bottom), modiﬁed from Picardi et al. (2005)
cryosphere (Evans 1963; Gudmandsen 1969;D r e w r y1983). However, these early systems
were incoherent and thus limited to recording the radar signal amplitude. The development
of terrestrial coherent ice-penetrating radars (Bentley et al. 1988;R a j ue ta l .1990; Chuah
1996; Gogineni et al.1998; Moussessian et al.2000; Peters et al.2005b), which could record
both the phase and amplitude, enabled improved along-track resolution and increased SNR
using synthetic aperture radar (SAR) processing techniques (Peters et al. 2005b).
Unfocused SAR processing involves the coherent integration (summing) of the individ-
ual radar signals over an along-track distance (integration length) and is optimized when
the integration length is equal to the Fresnel zone radius.
6 Focused SAR processing lever-
ages phase information to migrate reﬂected energy to its point of origin prior to coherent
integration resulting in improved along-track resolution and processing gain relative to un-
focused SAR processing (Legarsky et al.2001). Focusing algorithms have been adapted and
augmented to interrogate small-scale roughness and geometry of interfaces, permitting the
characterization of subglacial water systems (Schroeder et al.2014) and enhanced resolution
of internal layers (Heister and Scheiber 2018; Castelletti et al. 2019; Ferro 2019).
The coherent radar sounder developed by Moussessian et al. ( 2000) demonstrated the
feasibility of collecting high altitude radar sounding data and served as a testbed for future
spaceborne radar sounders. This sounder could operate at frequencies of 35, 50, 60, 75,
and 150 MHz with a 15 MHz bandwidth. Initial ﬁeld testing was done at 150 MHz with
a University of Kansas antenna system (Chuah 1996). The system was subsequently tested
at 60 MHz in Antarctic operations by the University of Texas Institute for Geophysics, the
success of which led to the development of derivative designs used in polar aerogeophysics
to the present day (Peters et al. 2005a). These radar sounders represent the predecessors for
radar sounders ﬂown on missions to Mars (Fig. 7) and ultimately Europa.
The complementary sounding frequencies of MARSIS (1.3 – 5.5 MHz) and SHARAD
(15 – 25 MHz) at Mars demonstrated the scientiﬁc value of a dual-frequency approach to
studying icy bodies (Seu et al. 2007; Jordan et al. 2009). The lower frequencies of MARSIS
penetrated deeper within the ice column while the higher bandwidth of SHARAD enabled
shallow internal layers to be resolved in greater detail (Fig. 8)( C r o c ie ta l .2011). The
use of two complementary frequencies represents a cornerstone of REASON’s approach to
sounding Europa.
6The Fresnel zone is deﬁned as the distance over which the phase of echoes from the central nadir point
change by π/2 radians (Peters et al. 2005b).


--- PAGE 11 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page11of91    51 
Fig. 8 Comparison between radargrams generated from ice-penetrating radar data collected over the Mars
North Polar Layered Deposits (top) by SHARAD (middle) and MARSIS (bottom), illustrating the scientiﬁc
value of complementary sounding frequencies, modiﬁed from material provided by Ali Safaeinili
1.6 REASONHigh-LevelInstrumentDescription
REASON is a dual-frequency (9 MHz and 60 MHz) radar designed to penetrate deep into
Europa’s ice crust, operating over a wide range of altitudes (35 km – 1000 km) across
a ﬂyby while simultaneously characterizing Europa’s surface/near-surface and exosphere.
REASON uses a 1 MHz bandwidth at a 9 MHz (33.3 m wavelength) High Frequency (HF)
center frequency and a 10 MHz bandwidth at a 60 MHz (5 m wavelength) Very High Fre-
quency (VHF) center frequency to achieve low-resolution (300 m in ice) full-depth sounding
and high-resolution (30 m in ice) shallow sounding simultaneously. The HF center frequency
of 9 MHz was selected because it enables robust performance in areas of high surface rough-
ness while avoiding prohibitive Faraday losses below 8 MHz. Although surface and volume
scattering tend to decrease with increasing wavelength (i.e., VHF is more susceptible to
scattering losses than HF), the HF band is highly susceptible to Jovian decametric noise. As
such, HF is practically limited to the shielded anti-Jovian hemisphere of Europa or when Jo-
vian noise is low. The unambiguous interpretation of subsurface interfaces from radargrams
requires discriminating nadir subsurface signals from off-nadir surface returns, referred to as
clutter. Along-track clutter will be discriminated by SAR processing, whereas across-track
clutter will be discriminated using dual-channel VHF interferometry. REASON includes
two VHF receive channels (separated by an across-track baseline) that will independently
receive returns from both nadir subsurface sounding targets and off-nadir across-track sur-
face clutter.
1.7 REASONMeasurementTechniques
REASON employs six measurement techniques: altimetry, reﬂectometry, sounding, inter-
ferometry, plasma characterization,a n dranging (Fig. 9).


--- PAGE 12 ---
   51 Page12of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
Fig.9 Summary of REASON ice shell domains and measurement techniques
1.7.1 Altimetry(VHF)
Altimetry refers to measuring height proﬁles along-track by identifying the surface return.
Due to spatial variations in attenuation within Europa’s ice shell, the observed strength of
subsurface reﬂectors is an ambiguous indicator of the composition of the materials that
deﬁne the interface (e.g., ice–water vs. ice–salt interface). As such, REASON’s altimetry
measurement is required to discriminate hydrostatic reﬂectors, such as an ice–water inter-
face from non-hydrostatic reﬂectors, such as an ice–salt interface. Subsurface water can be


--- PAGE 13 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page13of91    51 
conﬁrmed through hydrostatic analysis by comparing any inferred ice thickness, obtained
using the measured surface elevation and an assumed density contrast between water and
ice, to the measured ice thickness, obtained using surface and subsurface reﬂectors. This
method has been integral to the identiﬁcation of subglacial lakes under Earth’s ice sheets
(Kapitsa et al. 1996;C a r t e re ta l .2007). Similarly, this approach allows for non-water struc-
tures to be identiﬁed if the features do not have a hydrostatic relationship with the surface.
It is the combination of sounding and altimetry that is required to characterize observed
subsurface reﬂectors. REASON altimetry will be using a waveform ﬁtting method derived
from ocean altimetry to identify the surface return most likely originating from nadir. The
method is based on the idea that from a rough surface the altimetric return can be described
by a Brown model (Brown 1977). A subsequent parameter ﬁt on the pulse compressed data
then allows matching the surface return to the leading edge of the waveform. Despite being
derived from ocean altimetry, the method has been applied with great success to SHARAD
data on Mars (Steinbrügge et al. 2021).
1.7.2 Reﬂectometry(HF,VHF)
The limited bandwidth (i.e., vertical resolution) of REASON limits direct imaging of the
upper few hundred meters of the ice shell. As illustrated in Fig. 10, attenuation (i.e., elec-
trical conductivity) should be very low in this cold, near-surface region, so all interfaces
within the bandwidth-limited waveform should contribute to the echo. By comparing the
distribution of the surface echo strengths from a resolution cell with a theoretical probabil-
ity density function that accounts for stationary signal scattering, we can obtain the coherent
and incoherent components of the surface echo for that cell (Grima et al. 2014b). Although
these components are highly coupled, the coherent component is predominantly governed
by the permittivity contrast at the surface and the deterministic structure of the near-surface,
whereas the incoherent component is mainly controlled by scattering and surface roughness.
The local geologic context and the observations (e.g., topography) acquired from other in-
vestigations can provide constraints or reasonable assumptions on some surface properties
so that density or the presence of brine can be inferred (Grima et al.2014a, 2016). Although
brine intrusions would be transient and not thermodynamically stable in the near-surface
of Europa (Vu et al. 2016; Thomas et al. 2017), their presence would generate echoes with
a strongly coherent component. Such large anomalies in the coherent component of the
backscattered signal may be a sign of recent brines within the near-surface (Grima et al.
2016;H a y n e se ta l .2018b), which would have signiﬁcant implications for exchange pro-
cesses.
1.7.3 Sounding(HF,VHF)
REASON’s sounding measurement is required to produce HF and shallow VHF radargrams
up to depths of 30 km and 3 km, respectively. Full-depth VHFsounding extends to depths of
30 km, producing radargrams with higher vertical resolution (by a factor of∼ 10) compared
to the HF radargrams below 3 km. To reduce data volume, full-depth VHF sacriﬁces both
radiometric ﬁdelity (by reducing the bit depth) andinterferometry (by combining channels).
Simultaneous acquisition of HF and VHF allows us to correct for plasma effects through
their different responses to charged particle density. By recording raw coherent radar echoes
with phase intact and transmitting them to Earth, REASON has the capacity for SAR pro-
cessing to achieve high along-track resolution through post-acquisition, ground-based pro-
cessing. Requirements were deﬁned assuming unfocused SAR processing, deﬁned as the


--- PAGE 14 ---
   51 Page14of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
Fig.10 Modeled radar attenuation in Europa’s ice shell adopting the thermal model of Chyba et al. ( 1998),
electrical parameters of Moore (2000), and the regime modes described in Table 4
process of combining (coherently summing) the returns from individual pulses to increase
the SNR. Due to the design of the Europa Clipper mission as a multiple ﬂyby mission, the
SAR focusing architecture must be tailored to REASON and will be distinct from previous
orbital radar missions (Scanlan et al. 2021).
Note that although sounding measurements are required to produce radargrams capable
of recording subsurface echoes from speciﬁc maximum depths, this does not imply that
interfaces will necessarily be detected to these depths in practice. The depth to which a
radargram can be produced is governed by the spacecraft altitude, length of the receive win-
dow, and data volume constraints, whereas the depth to which the HF and VHF signals can
penetrate is governed by key parameters that describe the radar performance, observational
parameters such as spacecraft altitude, and the unknown properties of Europa that can atten-
uate the transmitted signal.
Radar waves scatter from structures in the ice (e.g., voids), but the resulting losses are
not expected to be signiﬁcant obstacles to penetration (Aglyamov et al. 2017). In contrast,
attenuation in warm ice with impurities could reduce penetration signiﬁcantly (Fig. 10). An
organizing principle of REASON’s approach to subsurface sounding is the concept of a non-
linear dependence of radar signal attenuation on temperature in a thermally conductive ice
shell, overlying an ice–water interface, or a thermally conductive lid, overlying a convective
ice layer (Fig. 10). Although the most reﬂective hypothesized interface on Europa will be
that of a smooth ice–water interface, this interface will likely not be the brightest because of


--- PAGE 15 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page15of91    51 
enhanced signal attenuation experienced as the interface is approached. Note that correlat-
ing variations in echo strength to variations in subsurface permittivity is challenging due to
the possibility of local or regional heterogeneities in attenuation rate through the ice shell.
Sounding will allow us to search for subsurface interfaces but to characterize the resultant
echoes will require additional information provided by altimetry.
1.7.4 Interferometry(VHF)
Interferometry is a radar technique which involves comparing the phase of echoes recorded
by separate receivers to establish whether the echo is from a subsurface nadir target or an
off-nadir cross-track surface/subsurface feature (Castelletti et al. 2017; Haynes et al. 2018a;
Scanlan et al. 2020). We exploit the fact that the VHF radar consists of several receivers
separated by a baseline. When recording reﬂected signals, the four element VHF array is
divided into two cross-track receive channels (one for each pair of VHF antennas on either
side of the spacecraft). Because the path lengths traveled by radar waves reﬂected from ﬂat
surface and subsurface targets at nadir are equivalent between the two cross-track antenna
pairs, the measured phase difference (interferometric phase) between the echoes will be
generally close to zero. However, due to small differences in traveled path lengths, echoes
from cross-track surface features will exhibit slightly different phases (Haynes et al.2018a).
Assuming that both the sub-surface nadir target and the surface off-nadir clutter will have
similar phase measurement errors, the phase measurement accuracy should not be larger
than half of the minimum interferometric phase of clutter minus any unknown interferomet-
ric phase bias. The actual phase measurement accuracy is taken as one standard deviation of
the interferometric phase which depends on SNR and number of independent samples.
By quantifying the interferometric phase between echoes recorded on the two cross-
track VHF receive channels, we will discriminate whether the echoes are likely due to a
subsurface nadir target or a cross-track off-nadir surface feature (Fig.11). The magnitude of
the interferometric phase between the echoes recorded by the two cross-track VHF receive
channels will depend on the cross-track look-angle to the feature generating the reﬂection.
A channel-to-channel phase measurement accuracy of 9° allows discrimination of clutter
from the shallowest nadir sounding targets (150 m at 400 km altitude). For lower altitudes
Fig. 11 Illustration of the geometry involved in interferometry, including two representations of off-nadir
surface features that could generate clutter, where “ribbons” represent rough, ﬂat terrain and “curbs” represent
smooth, angled terrain (EPM refers to Europa Point Model, Sect. 4.3)


--- PAGE 16 ---
   51 Page16of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
and deeper depths, the look angle (and the interferometric phase) of the corresponding sur-
face clutter (at equivalent range) increases. However, points of ambiguity exist as the phase
difference cycles over a wavelength. The capacity to use the two REASON VHF cross-
track channels to separate echoes via phase will be a function of the SNR of the echoes, the
phase stability of the VHF channels, and internal phase differences between the two VHF
channels.
1.7.5 PlasmaCharacterization(HF,VHF)
The dispersion of the HF radar signal due to plasma and particles in the exosphere can
be used to invert for the TEC below the spacecraft. Because increasing electron density
introduces frequency-dependent phase shifts in radar signals (Safaeinili et al. 2003, 2007;
Campbell et al. 2011, 2013b; Campbell and Watters 2016), the relative delay between the
HF and VHF surface echoes can be used to infer TEC (Scanlan et al. 2019). We will use
inversion techniques proven with MARSIS and SHARAD data (e.g., maximizing surface
echo contrast) and verify our analyses through comparison to largely nondispersive VHF
altimetry (Scanlan et al. 2019). However, this is a different approach than the autofocusing
methods implemented for Martian radar sounders (Safaeinili et al. 2003, 2007; Campbell
et al. 2011; Campbell and Watters 2016) as the 1 MHz REASON HF bandwidth is not
wide enough to exhibit appreciable defocusing effects such as are observed in MARSIS and
SHARAD data and no defocusing is expected across the REASON VHF band (Grima et al.
2015).
This inversion allows ionospheric correction for HF sounding (Mouginot et al. 2008)
with simultaneous searching for active plumes, cryovolcanic eruptions of water originating
from Europa’s subsurface, indicated by localized TEC anomalies caused by the ionization of
plume-supplied neutral particles (Cartacci et al.2013). Concurrent observations between the
Plasma Instrument for Magnetic Sounding (PIMS) (see Westlake et al.2023, this collection)
and REASON instruments would provide electron densities at the spacecraft location along
with the TEC between the spacecraft and surface. This combination could better constrain
the local ionospheric density proﬁle important for quantifying the plasma dynamic interac-
tion at Europa and any potential contributions from the ionosphere to the observed induction
signature.
1.7.6 Ranging(VHF)
Whereas altimetry refers to measuring height proﬁles along-track by identifying the surface
return, ranging is intended to provide a differential range to a crossover point by combining
stereo-derived Digital Terrain Models (DTMs) from the Europa Imaging System (see Tur-
tle et al. 2024, this collection) with REASON radargrams. Ranging, when combined with
orbit determination, allows the tidal Love number, h
2, to be estimated directly (Mazarico
et al. 2014). Simple conﬁrmation of the ocean’s existence, via measurement of h 2, requires
sampling the amplitude of the tidal deformation with a spatial and temporal distribution
that adequately samples the tidal potential (Sect. 2.3.4). REASON will make use of accu-
rate orbit determination, in coordination with radio science, to contribute to determining the
amplitude of gravitational tides using ranging at crossover points. Here, crossover points
provide differential range measurements (Steinbrügge et al. 2018).


--- PAGE 17 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page17of91    51 
2R E A S O N S c i e n c e
2.1 DrivingHypotheses,ScienceObjectives,andStrategicScienceGuidance
The REASON instrument has been designed to test three key hypotheses:
(1) The ice shell of Europa hosts lenses of liquid water and near-surface brines.
(2) The ice shell overlies an ocean decoupled from the silicate interior and is subject to tidal
ﬂexing.
(3) The exosphere, near-surface, ice shell, and ocean participate in exchange essential to
the habitability of this moon.
To test these hypotheses and support future exploration, REASON will accomplish the
following science objectives:
(1) Characterize the distribution of any shallow subsurface water;
(2) Investigate the processes governing material exchange among the ocean, ice shell, sur-
face, and exosphere;
(3) Search for an ice–ocean interface and characterize the ice shell’s global thermophysical
structure;
(4) Constrain Europa’s radial tidal deformations.
The Europa Clipper science team has deﬁned four REASON Guiding Science datasets
that are derived from the REASON driving hypotheses and objectives (Table1) and directly
contribute to Europa Clipper’s Level 1 (L1) science requirements (see Pappalardo et al.
2024, this collection). Seven additional REASON Extended Science datasets also compati-
Table 1 Datasets for REASON Guiding and Extended Science
REASON
Dataset
Name
Measurements Description Domain Coverage
REASON
Guiding
Science
Near-Surface
Properties
Reﬂectometry
(HF, VHF)
Altimetry (VHF)
Determine regolith
cohesiveness, thickness,
and subsurface layering;
surface roughness and
slopes; and the distribution
of blocks
Surface to
Near-Surface
Global
Mapping
Shallow
Subsurface
Sounding (HF,
VHF)
Reﬂectometry
(HF, VHF)
Interferometry
(VHF)
Altimetry (VHF)
Map the distribution of
subsurface water,
near-surface brines, ice
shell structure, and
exchange processes by
characterizing the
electromagnetic properties
and interface geometries
Shallow
Subsurface
Global
Mapping
Full Depth
Subsurface
Exchange
Full Depth
Subsurface
Global
Mapping
Ice-Ocean
Interface
Sounding (HF,
VHF)
Altimetry (VHF)
Search for an ice-ocean
interface by characterizing
the surface elevation and
ice shell thermophysical
properties, as well as
searching directly for any
ice-ocean interfaces
Ice-Ocean
Interface
Global
Search


--- PAGE 18 ---
   51 Page18of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
Table 1 (Continued)
REASON
Dataset
Name
Measurements Description Domain Coverage
REASON
Extended
Science
Tidal
Deformation
Ranging (VHF) Characterize the
topographic signature of the
tidal shape by constraining
the second-degree Love
number h
2 to 0.3 absolute
accuracy, to conﬁrm the
existence of a subsurface
ocean and constrain the ice
shell thickness
Ice–Ocean
Interface
Intersections
distributed
with respect
to orbital
position and
geography
Ice Shell
Thermal
Anomaly
Search
Sounding (HF,
VHF)
Reﬂectometry
(HF, VHF)
Altimetry (VHF)
Characterize the thermal
signatures of current or
recent geological activity
Full Depth
Subsurface
Global
Mapping
Subsurface
Landform
Sounding (HF,
VHF)
Reﬂectometry
(HF, VHF)
Interferometry
(VHF)
Altimetry (VHF)
Characterize the subsurface
structure, near-surface
characteristics, and surface
topography of major
geologic landforms
Shallow
Subsurface
Global
Mapping
Shallow
Composition
Reﬂectometry
(HF, VHF)
Altimetry (VHF)
Assess the composition of
surface materials, the
geological context of the
surface, the potential for
geological activity, the
existence of near-surface
water and the potential for
active upwelling of
ocean-derived material
Surface to
Near-Surface
Global
Searching
Surface
Activity
Evidence
Reﬂectometry
(HF, VHF)
Search for spatial variations
in surface density that are
indicative of plume deposits
Near-Surface
Plasma
Column
Density
Plasma
Characterization
(HF, VHF)
Characterize the TEC of the
local ionosphere with a
detection threshold and
measurement accuracy
value of 3 × 10
14 m−2.
Exosphere
Plume
Search
Plasma
Characterization
(HF, VHF)
Search for active plumes
below the spacecraft with a
detection threshold TEC
value of 3 × 10
14 m−2
Exosphere
ble with these hypotheses and objectives will be collected in the course of REASON opera-
tions (Table 1). The requirements associated with these extended datasets are referred to as
Planning Guidelines.


--- PAGE 19 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page19of91    51 
2.2 RequirementsforCoverageQuality
Requirements imposed on the groundtrack distribution of ﬂybys are similarly organized by
the REASON Guiding Science datasets, and are speciﬁed in terms of panels, segments,
and intersections. Panels are used to divide Europa’s surface into 14 subsections deﬁned
by latitude and longitude, which sample domains of Europa with properties that differ due
to variations in tidal dissipation, surface temperature, and ocean forcing (see Pappalardo
et al. 2024, this collection). Segments represent portions of the groundtrack within a panel
where REASON measurements can be obtained (e.g., within altitude limits). Intersections
are signiﬁcant because they enable the independent registration and extension of 2D proﬁles,
collected along segments, to understand 3D subsurface structure. Analysis of signal char-
acter at intersections additionally represents a path towards improved relative radiometric
calibration and ensures consistent geologic interpretation over the mission.
Global coverage is considered achieved when ≥11 of the 14 panels are sampled by
groundtrack segments. For all REASON Guiding Science datasets except for the Ice–Ocean
Interface dataset, groundtrack segments must be at least 800 km in length, below an altitude
of 400 km, and intersect multiple times (2 anti-Jovian and 1 sub-Jovian) to count toward
global coverage. Note that global coverage is skewed towards the anti-Jovian hemisphere
where both frequencies can operate (i.e., where the HF is shielded from Jovian decametric
noise). For the Ice–Ocean Interface dataset, groundtrack segments are not required to inter-
sect, but must be at least 1600 km in length, below an altitude of 1000 km. To search for
an ice–ocean interface, correlated gradients in ice thickness and surface elevation must be
tracked at the panel scale (∼ 1600 km per side).
This coverage supports a detailed characterization of the following ice shell domains
(Fig. 9 and Table 1): (i) the bounding exosphere — composed of ionic species which are
either sputtered from Europa’s surface or transported from the subsurface via plumes (ii)
the surface to near-surface — likely heavily modiﬁed by Jovian system radiation products
and any plume activity, (iii) the shallow subsurface (i.e., the upper few kilometers) — likely
dominated by brittle fracture, (iv) the full depth subsurface (i.e., to tens of kilometers) —
which has the potential for ductile rheologies that support convection of the deep interior
and interfaces deﬁned by phase transitions (e.g., eutectics
7), as well as (v) the ice-ocean
interface — modulated by accretion (freezing) and ablation (melting) processes and whose
existence has implications for tidal deformation of the entire ice shell.
2.3 ProbingEuropafromExospheretoOcean
Europa’s habitability is in part governed by the availability of oxidants and reductants, which
life can harness as energy through redox reactions (McCollom 1999; Zolotov and Shock
2004;H a n de ta l .2009). Expected redox disequilibria between reduced suboceanic rocks
and corresponding H
2-, H 2S-bearing ﬂuids, and oxidized oceanic water species (sulfate,
bicarbonate) should provide metabolic energy for microorganisms (McCollom 1999; Zolo-
tov and Shock 2004). In addition, Europa’s ice shell is thought to supply strong oxidants
(e.g., O2,H 2O2), which are radiolytically produced on the surface (Chyba2000). Constrain-
ing exchange between surface materials and the ocean is essential to constrain Europa’s
7The term eutectic is used to refer to the interface deﬁned by the minimum temperature at which ice tran-
sitions from solid to molten, resulting from the presence of impurities which depress the freezing point
(Kalousová et al. 2017; e.g., Culha et al. 2020). The eutectic temperature is governed by the composition
of non-ice impurities (Wolfenbarger et al. 2022b).


--- PAGE 20 ---
   51 Page20of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
habitability–the main objective of the Europa Clipper mission. By probing Europa from
exosphere to ocean, REASON will provide insights into processes of surface–ice–ocean
exchange and the properties of the ice shell which modulate them.
2.3.1 Exosphere
Much of our knowledge of the magnetospheric environment of Europa comes from Galileo
observations (Gurnett et al. 1998; Kurth et al. 2001; Bagenal et al. 2016, 2017). These are
largely due to inference from the upper hybrid resonance frequency which, with the mea-
sured magnetic ﬁeld, allows a determination of the electron plasma frequency, hence elec-
tron density. Kurth et al. (2001) showed that the electron density near Europa’s orbit could
vary from about 50 cm
−3 to over 500 cm −3 although the latter was an exceptional case
observed near the E12 ﬂyby. Typical values are closer to 100 cm −3. Ten vertical electron
density proﬁles through Galileo radio occultations during the E4, E6, E19 and E24 ﬂybys
(Kliore et al.1997; McGrath et al.2009) reveal a mostly surface-bound ionosphere (i.e., with
the highest density layer at or near the surface) except for one proﬁle exhibiting a maximum
electron density of ∼ 10
4 cm−3 at ∼ 100 km altitude. The plasma scale height is reported to
be 240 ± 40 km near the surface and 440 ± 60 km above 300 km, and the TEC can reach
up to ∼ 4 × 1015 m−2. However, three occultation detections were negative (i.e., weak to
non-detection) near the downstream wake region of Europa, supposedly due to the absence
of ionization processes there at the time of observation.
The spatial and temporal variability of Europa’s exosphere results from concurrent iono-
spheric production processes prevailing in speciﬁc hemispheres independently rotating with
different time constants: solar photoionization in the day side and impact ionization predom-
inant in the trailing side from the Io plasma torus. The average ionosphere production rate
from impact ionization exceeds photoionization (Saur et al.1998). However, their combined
action in asymmetrically wrapping Europa with an ionosphere, setting its exobase and pac-
ing its overall temporal variability is still poorly explained (Bagenal and Dols2020). Plumes
represent another potential source of spatial and temporal variability. A re-examination of
data collected during the E12 Galileo ﬂyby revealed ﬂuctuations in the magnetic ﬁeld, in-
cluding a possible peak in the electron density exceeding 2000 cm
−3 (Jia et al. 2018). From
these data, Jia et al. ( 2018) concluded that it was possible Galileo had passed through a
plume with characteristics consistent with the putative plumes detected by Hubble (Roth
et al. 2014).
REASON plasma characterization will enhance our understanding of electron density
in the exosphere by characterizing the TEC in the nadir column between the spacecraft and
Europa’s surface, complementing data obtained with PIMS. Additionally, REASONplasma
characterization will support the search for active plumes alongside other remote sensing
(e.g., Europa Ultraviolet Spectrograph (Europa-UVS), EIS, the Mapping Imaging Spectrom-
eter for Europa (MISE), and the Europa Thermal Emission Imaging System (E-THEMIS)),
and in situ (e.g., Europa Clipper Magnetometer (ECM), PIMS, the SUrface Dust Analyzer
(SUDA), and the MAss Spectrometer for Planetary Exploration (MASPEX)) instruments.
REASON’s ability to search for localized ionospheric anomalies possibly related to active
plumes is limited to portions of the groundtracks where both HF and VHF data can be ac-
quired (i.e., the anti-Jovian hemisphere). Finally, as REASON can only infer TEC in the
nadir column between the spacecraft and Europa, the ﬂyby tour geometry implies REA-
SON will be least sensitive to active plumes altering the Europan ionosphere near closest
approach, where the intervening ionosphere is the thinnest.


--- PAGE 21 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page21of91    51 
2.3.2 SurfacetoNear-Surface
Although the surface of Europa is largely dominated by water ice, a range of processes
can alter its composition and properties. Exogenic processes like impact gardening through
charged particles and micrometeorite bombardment can alter the chemical composition and
porosity of the endogenous upper surface layers to a depth of 30 cm on average (Moore
et al. 2009; Costello et al. 2021). Quantiﬁcation of this process and its spatial distribution is
necessary for assessing the delivery of radiolytically-produced oxidants into the deeper ice
shell and down to the ocean (Hand et al. 2007). Radiation processes from charged particles
can drive thermal sintering, increasing the strength and density of the surface at time scales
<100 Myr (Molaro et al. 2019; Choukroun et al. 2020). REASON is highly suited to study-
ing these processes due to the sensitivity of reﬂectometry to properties of the near-surface.
For example, on Earth the reﬂection coefﬁcient from fresh snow to compact ice spans a
radiometric response of almost 30 dB (Grima et al. 2014a, 2016).
Spectroscopic evidence of salts associated with resurfacing features suggests endogenic
material, possibly sourced from the sub-ice ocean, is being transported to the surface (Brown
and Hand 2013; Fischer et al. 2015;T r u m b oe ta l .2019, 2020, 2022), consistent with hy-
potheses for the inﬁltration of subsurface brines into near-surface porous regolith (Head and
Pappalardo 1999; Schmidt et al. 2011). Ephemeral liquid brines near the surface could be
detected by reﬂectometry as a region that is anomalously bright relative to the surrounding
near-surface (Grima et al. 2016). However, liquid brines near the surface are thermodynam-
ically unstable and would rapidly freeze (Abramov and Spencer 2008), forming layer(s) of
saline ice and hydrated salts within the porous regolith (Zolotov and Shock 2001; Thomas
et al. 2017).
These layers, analogous to frozen melt lenses in ﬁrn, likely have a distinct scattering sig-
nature that can be similarly distinguished by reﬂectometry (Rutishauser et al. 2016;C h a n
et al. 2023b). Salt lag deposits, caused by sublimation of ice associated with frozen brines
at the surface, could form additional layers (Zolotov and Shock 2001); however, the reﬂec-
tometry signature associated with such features has not yet been evaluated. Fossil and/or
contemporary plume fallout deposits represent another source of layering at Europa’s sur-
face (e.g., Fagents et al. 2000; Fagents 2003). Near-surface densities derived from REA-
SON reﬂectometry measurements (Fig. 3) will aid in distinguishing high porosity (0.5 to
0.9; Quick and Hedman 2020) plume fallout deposits from a conventional Europa surface.
Because REASON’s VHF and HF frequencies respond differently to different layer thick-
nesses, properties, and depths (Mouginot et al.2009; Scanlan et al.2022;C h a ne ta l .2023b),
comparing VHF and HF reﬂectometry results could provide additional insights. For candi-
date plume fallout deposits identiﬁed by EIS, this could constrain plume material ﬂux and
volume, longevity, and morphology (Scanlan et al. 2022
), whereas for frozen brine layers,
this could constrain layer thickness and depth (Chan et al. 2023b).
Surface temperature variations that may or may not be related to the presence of liquid
brines near the surface will primarily be assessed through measurements made by the E-
THEMIS (see Christensen et al. 2024, this collection). REASON reﬂectometry will supple-
ment E-THEMIS investigations in the search for thermal anomalies by constraining porosity
variations (Grima et al. 2014a) or roughness smoothing (Grima et al. 2014b) that could re-
sult from the cooling of a warm body. The skin depth of REASON reﬂectometry is also
greater by one to two orders of magnitude than E-THEMIS, allowing surface properties to
be reconciled with properties at depth within the near-surface.


--- PAGE 22 ---
   51 Page22of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
2.3.3 ShallowandFullDepthSubsurface
V oyager and Galileo spacecraft observations of Europa’s surface revealed a rich variety of
landforms (see Daubar et al. 2024, this collection) that suggest active geological processes
and surface-interior exchange occurred at some period within the geological history of the
shell (<100 Myr). Studies focused on the morphology of these features have prompted a
range of hypotheses for processes occurring within the outer ice shell, many of which have
involved the presence of shallow subsurface water.
The presence of liquid water in the shallow subsurface is both a driver and byproduct of
hypothesized mechanisms of surface-ice-ocean exchange, all of which are likely modulated
by tidal forcing. Ocean water may be directly injected into the ice shell interior through basal
fractures (Michaut and Manga 2014; Craft et al. 2016), whereas others have proposed that
water may be generated through ice shell melting caused by convection (Kalousová et al.
2017; Vilella et al.2020), diapirism (Pappalardo et al.1998; Nimmo and Manga2002; Sotin
et al. 2002; Pappalardo and Barr 2004; Schmidt et al. 2011), and/or strike-slip displacement
(Kalousová et al. 2016; Gaidos and Nimmo 2000; Hammond 2020; Nimmo and Gaidos
2002).
The morphologies of some double ridges, as well as lenticulae,
8 suggest subsurface sills
of water may have been present at the time of formation (Dombard et al.2013; Johnston and
Montési 2014; Michaut and Manga2014; Manga and Michaut2017;S i n g e re ta l .2021;C u l -
berg et al. 2022). Similarly, the unique morphology of chaos terrains is hypothesized to be
associated with warm ice, partial melt, and/or liquid water (Collins et al. 2000; Collins and
Nimmo 2009). Based upon studies of surface topography, Schmidt et al. (2011) suggest that
chaos terrain is formed by the collapse and refreezing of active subsurface water reservoirs.
In the case of Thera Macula, depressions in topography suggest some part of the water lens
could still be active (Schmidt et al. 2011). Recent imagery of Europa collected by the Juno
Stellar Reference Unit revealed a new chaos feature with morphology consistent with the
lens collapse hypothesis proposed for Thera Macula, as well as low albedo materials that
could be evidence of brine inﬁltration (Becker et al. 2023).
Further features of interest are impact structures. While craters are rare on Europa’s sur-
face, larger impact structures, such as Manannán crater, likely resulted in the formation of
substantial melt reservoirs (Steinbrügge et al. 2020a; Carnahan et al. 2022). Callanish and
Tyre are the only known multi-ring impact features on Europa (see Daubar et al. 2024,t h i s
collection). Their size and morphology make them the best candidates for complete pene-
tration of the ice shell by impacts (Moore et al. 2001; Cox and Bauer 2015;S i n g e re ta l .
2023). As such, studying their subsurface morphology is likely to provide insights into the
properties of the ice shell at the time of impact.
Liquid water within the shallow subsurface could remain liquid for up to a few hun-
dred thousand years, depending on the reservoir volume and depth (Abramov et al. 2013;
Manga and Michaut 2017; Chivers et al. 2021). However, as freezing progresses, these wa-
ter bodies pressurize and cryoconcentrate. Overpressurization can induce cryovolcanism,
forming plumes (Steinbrügge et al. 2020a; Lesage et al. 2022), whereas cryoconcentration
can cause salts to precipitate, forming salt layers (Buffo et al. 2020; Chivers et al. 2021).
Low albedo regions associated with ridges, ridge complexes, and lenticulae have been in-
terpreted as potential indicators of cryovolcanism that accompanied formation/evolution of
these geological features (Greenberg et al. 1999; Fagents et al. 2000; Fagents 2003; Mitri
and Showman 2005; Prockter and Schenk 2005).
8Lenticulae are small circular or elliptical dark spots corresponding to topographic lows (pits) or highs
(domes) (Doggett et al. 2009).


--- PAGE 23 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page23of91    51 
Because Europa’s surface features are likely direct expressions of the subsurface,
REASON’s sounding and altimetry measurements will be able to differentiate between var-
ious hypotheses for the formation of these features by quantitatively characterizing the sur-
face while simultaneously offering a window into the subsurface. REASON is capable of
directly detecting the presence and distribution of subsurface water in the shallow subsur-
face on Europa by sounding the ice shell for sharp reﬂections from perched water bodies
as well as brine-rich and/or salt-rich features. Reﬂections from vertical cracks inﬁlled with
liquid water have a distinct “corner-reﬂector” signature in unfocused radar data (Peters et al.
2007b) and may be detectable by REASON. If a plume were to be detected, REASON
sounding will aid in isolating the source of the eruptive material, complementing observa-
tions from other investigations (e.g., E-THEMIS, see Christensen et al.2024, this collection;
EIS, see Turtle et al. 2024, this collection).
REASON altimetry will measure the elevation of surface features with horizontal extents
spanning tens of kilometers. For features with detectable subsurface interfaces, such as ice
blocks and chaos matrix regions, complementarysounding and altimetry measurements will
enable interfaces at depth to be tested for hydrostatic compensation to conﬁrm the presence
of liquid water. Even in the absence of active liquid water, subsurface interfaces detected by
sounding can be evaluated in the context of the surface topography provided byaltimetry to
evaluate the potential for relict liquid water (e.g., Culberg et al.2022). Digital elevation mod-
els (DEMs) provided by EIS will provide additional context for interpretation of subsurface
interfaces detected by sounding.R E A S O Ninterferometry and cluttergrams
9 generated from
EIS DEMs will ensure clutter from off-nadir surface features is not mistaken for subsurface
interfaces at nadir.
2.3.4 Ice-OceanInterface
Measuring the tidal Love numbers h2,k 2,a n dl2 and linear combinations of them has been
suggested as a viable method to constrain the thermal and interior structure of icy satellites
(Moore and Schubert 2000;W a h re ta l .2006). Whereas changes in the tidal potential can
be determined by measuring the time-varying gravity ﬁeld with radio Doppler tracking (see
Mazarico et al. 2023, this collection), the determination of the radial deformation, parame-
terized by h2 requires altimetry measurements over several tidal cycles at different locations.
Crossover points at which two altimetric measurements at the surface are taken at a different
tidal phase are a means for determining tidal amplitudes. By combining altimetric data, in
particular crossovers from REASON with surface topography from stereo-photogrammetric
techniques with EIS, the determination of h2 is possible provided the signal is large enough
(Steinbrügge et al. 2018). Numerical simulations of Europa’s tidal response (1.8-day semid-
iurnal tides) predict that tidal deﬂections are an order of magnitude larger if an ocean is
present (∼ 30 m vs. 1 m) (Moore and Schubert 2000). Thus, h 2 determination would pro-
vide evidence for (or against) a Europan subsurface ocean, complementary to subsurface
sounding or other evidence from gravity ﬁeld determination or magnetic ﬁeld induction.
Typical values for h 2 are around 1.2 in the presence of an ocean and drop below 0.1
if no ocean is present (Moore and Schubert 2000). Using the estimated error bounds for
h2 alone would allow unambiguous conﬁrmation or rejection of the hypothesis of a global
ocean (Steinbrügge et al. 2018). To constrain the thickness of the ice shell a combination of
both Love numbers 1 + k2 − h2 would be most promising (Wahr et al. 2006). In that case
9Cluttergrams are synthetic radargrams generated from DEMs which are used to determine if nadir subsurface
interfaces can be explained by energy reﬂecting from off-nadir surface features (e.g., Choudhary et al.2016).


--- PAGE 24 ---
   51 Page24of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
the ice thickness could be constrained within an uncertainty of 15 km, provided rheological
parameters of the ice shell (rigidity and viscosity) are known (Steinbrügge et al. 2018).
The best constraints on the viscosity of the ice shell could be obtained if the phase-lag, the
deviation of the tidal bulge from the sub-Jovian line, could be measured. However, such a
measurement would be even more challenging and could only be obtained with REASON
ranging if the ice shell is very dissipative. That would imply a phase-lag of a few degrees,
which might be detectable if the deformation is strong enough. In case both phase lags in k
2
and h2 could be measured, the phase-lag difference could further constrain whether strong
tidal dissipation is occurring only in the ice shell or if the silicate mantle and/or crust of
Europa is dissipative as well (Hussmann et al. 2016). Optical determination of Europa’s
physical libration (Love number l2), as was done for Enceladus (Thomas et al.2016), would
further constrain Europa’s tidal dissipation properties.
Studies of the thickness of Europa’s ice shell and its thermal state – thick or thin, convec-
tive or conductive – have spawned competing hypotheses. Estimated ice thicknesses have
ranged between ∼ 3 km (Carr et al. 1998; Greenberg et al. 1999; Walker and Rhoden 2022)
and ≳30 km (Cassen et al. 1979; Squyres et al. 1983; Pappalardo et al. 1998; Schenk 2002;
Vilella et al. 2020). Many of the estimates for a thin ice shell are based upon mechanical
models (e.g., Billings and Kattenhorn 2005) and likely reﬂect an ice shell thickness ear-
lier in Europa’s history. For Europa, the ice shell thickness and heat ﬂow are inextricably
linked. Heat ﬂow is a fundamental property that determines a body’s level of internal activ-
ity and thermophysical structure. Actively deforming regions on Europa are hypothesized to
exhibit brittle-ductile and ductile-plastic transitions at depth (Goldsby and Kohlstedt 2001;
McCarthy et al. 2011). Thicker (≳10 km) ice shells are predicted to undergo solid-state
convection at depth (McKinnon 1999;B a r ra n dS h o w m a n2009). A recent thermodynamic
study suggests that the total ice shell thickness is likely>20 km, where the conductive layer
thickness is ∼ 10 km (Howell 2021).
REASON sounding will help to resolve the ice shell thickness debate by searching glob-
ally for an ice–ocean interface indicated by a sharp, continuous ( >1000 km long) radar
reﬂection due to any major ice–water permittivity contrast up to a depth of 30 km below
the surface. This involves tracking surface topography and the depth of the lower interface
over gradients in ice shell thickness. To ﬁrst order, these gradients in ice shell thickness are
expected to be at the hemispheric scale (i.e., pole to equator). Because the ice–ocean inter-
face is at the melting temperature (<273 K), and radar attenuation is strongly temperature-
dependent (Fig. 10), the ice-ocean interface will likely be challenging to detect. If the ice
shell is purely conductive, detection should be possible since these losses will be conﬁned to
the warm region close to the ice-interface. In a convecting ice shell, this warm region poten-
tially spans the entire convective layer, resulting in large radar signal attenuation. As such,
direct detection of the ice–ocean interface by REASON at the hemispheric scale will be un-
likely if the ice shell is convective; although, the presence of a eutectic interface at the upper
parts of convective cells might be detectable (Zolotov and Kargel 2009; Kalousová et al.
2017; Culha et al. 2020). Additionally, it has been hypothesized that cold downwellings
produced by convection may provide a distribution of low attenuation windows into the
ocean–ice interface (McKinnon 2005; Kalousová et al. 2017). In summary, by detecting
spatially variable zones of anomalous radar scattering and absorption, REASON sounding
will reveal the thermophysical structure of the ice shell, placing constraints on the heat ﬂow.
These data will also inform occurrences and sizes of convective cells, as well as regions of
convective ice upwelling and downwelling (Kalousová et al. 2017). Note that detection of
any interface serves as a constraint on minimum ice shell thickness.


--- PAGE 25 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page25of91    51 
3 RequirementsforMeasurementQuality
There are nine types of requirements imposed on measurement quality that apply to the four
baseline measurement techniques. These types of requirements are summarized in Table 2
and deﬁned in Sects. 3.1–3.7.
Table 2 Requirements on measurement quality organized by baseline measurement technique
Baseline Measurement Techniques
Sounding Altimetry Reﬂectometry Interferometry
Requirements
on
Measurement
Quality
Blind Zone HF/VHF: <7×
vertical resolution
from the surface in
ice
N/A N/A N/A
Vertical
Resolution
VHF: ≤30 m in ice
(ﬁner) in top 3 km
HF: ≤300 m in ice
to 30 km depth
HF/VHF: ≤300 m
in ice (coarser) from
3k mt o3 0k md e p t h
N/A N/A N/A
Vertical
Precision
VHF: ≤15 m in ice
(ﬁner) for top 3 km
HF: ≤150 m in ice
to 30 km depth
HF/VHF: ≤150 m
in ice (coarser) from
3k mt o3 0k md e p t h
VHF: ≤15 m in
vacuum
N/A N/A
Along-Track
Resolution
VHF: ≤2k m( ﬁ n e r )
HF: ≤5.5 km
HF/VHF: ≤10 km
(coarser)
VHF: ≤2k m
(ﬁner)
HF/VHF: ≤10 km
(coarser)
N/A N/A
Sampled
Along-Track
Resolution
N/A N/A VHF: ≤10 km
HF: ≤27.5 km
N/A
Clutter
Discrimination
N/A N/A N/A VHF: >10 km
for 80% of any
groundtrack to
3k md e p t h
Radiometric
Precision
N/A N/A VHF:1d B
over ≤
10 km
HF: 1 dB over
≤ 27.5 km
N/A
Radiometric
Accuracy
N/A N/A VHF:1d B
over ≤ 10 km
HF: 1 dB over
≤ 27.5 km
N/A
Radiometric
Stability
HF: 2 dB within a
ﬂyby in the
subsurface
N/A N/A N/A
*We compare the different resolution requirements provided by the 10 MHz VHF bandwidth and the 1 MHz
HF bandwidth using the terms “ﬁner” for a smaller numeric requirement and “coarser” for a large numeric
requirement.


--- PAGE 26 ---
   51 Page26of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
3.1 BlindZone
It is expected that strong surface returns from a smooth and ﬂat ice surface will lead to side
lobes10 in the range echo whose power levels are proportional to that of the main lobe, and
which can rise above the background noise level. The region where these side lobes consti-
tute the noise ﬂoor is called the blind zone, although some bright reﬂectors may still be visi-
ble. The range extent and power level of each side lobe needs to be controlled or suppressed
so that reﬂections from shallow subsurface interfaces could be detected. By applying a pro-
cessing window to the receive echo, the range extent and power level of the side lobes can be
reduced. The blind zone is required to be less than seven times the vertical resolution in ice,
which corresponds to the predicted range extent of the side lobes assuming a Hann window.
3.2 VerticalResolutionandPrecision
Vertical resolution governs the theoretical minimum spacing between two reﬂecting inter-
faces that can be distinguished by the radar. A VHF vertical resolution of 30 m in ice, over
an along-track resolution cell, is required to conﬁdently separate subsurface features, as well
as for clutter discrimination from subsurface features. 10% of the thickness of a 300 m thick
ﬂoating ice block in water is ∼ 30 m, so a vertical resolution of at least 30 m is required
to conﬁdently map the subsurface. In Europa’s chaos regions, the lower range of ice block
thicknesses is expected to be nearly 300 m thick (Nimmo and Giese2005). This requirement
is for two reﬂectors with the same returned power. A HF vertical resolution of 300 m, over an
along-track resolution cell, is required to separate surface from subsurface return of objects
such as liquid water lenses and bands (Blankenship et al. 2009). For example, resolving the
∼ 300 m thickness of a ﬂoating ice block requires a sounding vertical resolution of 300 m in
ice. 3 km is the best estimate of the depth of eutectic lenses; 300 m is 10% of this.
In practice, it is the vertical precision, and not the vertical resolution, which limits the
precision of a range estimate to an isolated target. The vertical precision is a function of
both the vertical resolution and SNR, where vertical precision is improved with increasing
SNR (Cavitte et al. 2016). Requiring the vertical precision be at least a factor of two better
than the vertical resolution limits the uncertainty associated with depth and orientation of
reﬂectors critical to testing for ﬂotation or embayment. As such, a VHF vertical precision
of 15 m in vacuum, over an along-track resolution cell, is required to measure the range to
surface features such as pits, domes, and diapirs, whereas a VHF vertical precision of 15 m
in ice, over an along-track resolution cell, is required to constrain the depth and orientation
of subsurface structures.
3.3 Along-TrackResolution
Along-track resolution governs the ability to discriminate adjacent features in altimetry
and sounding data along an interface in the direction of the satellite groundtrack. A ﬁner
HF/VHF along-track resolution of 5.5 km/2 km allows us to characterize a wide range of
resurfacing features (including pits, domes, and chaos) and resolve ice–water interfaces, hy-
draulic potential beneath ﬂoating blocks up to altitudes of 400 km. A coarser along-track
resolution of 10 km allows any ice–water interface as well as associated thermophysical
structures to be resolved up to altitudes of 1000 km.
10In radar sounding data, side lobes are peaks (lobes) that appear adjacent to the main peak in a reﬂected
signal resulting from pulse compression of the transmitted chirp waveform.


--- PAGE 27 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page27of91    51 
3.4 SampledAlong-TrackResolution
The sampled along-track resolution ensures statistical robustness of observations in support
of reﬂectometry. Ideally, two consecutive pulses should be independent for best statistics
recovery. However, the along-track spacing to ensure independence from pulse to pulse is
not formally documented in the literature, but this length should vary with roughness. It is
inﬁnite in the end case of reﬂections from a perfectly ﬂat surface, but only one surface echo
is then necessary to recover the delta function that characterizes its statistical distribution.
Then, the along-track spacing is expected to decrease with increasing roughness as the ran-
domness of the scatterers increases. We associate the necessary along-track spacing to the
radius of the effective area of constructive interference, i.e., the area of a self-afﬁne sur-
face beyond which constructive addition has dropped signiﬁcantly (Eq. 20 in Shepard and
Campbell 1999). This approximates to about 20% of the wavelength for the rougher terrains
measured at Europa (Steinbrügge et al. 2020b). This minimum spacing is sufﬁcient to re-
cover robust statistics from 1000 empirical echoes spaced by 1 m at a 5-m wavelength for
airborne observations (Grima et al.2016). The VHF along-track resolution≤10 km/27.5 km
at spacecraft altitude ≤400 km is required to constrain surface statistical echo properties to
discern porous or impermeable ice and liquid or frozen brines or brine-soaked ice. The
10 km/27.5 km comes from the requirement that a patch must be at least ﬁve times the
along-track resolution of sounding measurements (2 km/5.5 km) for sufﬁcient sampling.
This requirement assumes that >1000 samples will be collected over the 10 km/27.5 km re-
gion for statistical robustness. Although HF has a reduced along-track resolution compared
to VHF, it has a higher capacity and robustness to penetrate deeper regions where liquid
water may be present. This HF requirement is optimized forsounding. HF and VHF operate
as complementary wavelengths.
3.5 ClutterDiscrimination
REASON’s VHF beam pattern (Fig. 25) is such that echoes from cross-track, off-nadir sur-
face features can arrive at the spacecraft and be recorded at the same time as nadir subsur-
face echoes from the upper 3 km of the ice shell. This introduces an inherent ambiguity
as to whether received echoes originate from a subsurface target of interest or a surface
feature. As such, in order to properly interpret the resulting radargrams, it is important that
these “clutter” features be discriminated from subsurface nadir targets. For the VHF shallow
sounding and interferometry measurements in the Shallow Subsurface and Full Depth Sub-
surface Exchange datasets, the REASON VHF will discriminate between surface clutter and
subsurface nadir features longer than 10 km at observation depths between the near-surface
blind zone to 3 km for greater than 80% of any groundtrack at altitudes between 35 km and
400 km. A groundtrack percentage of 80% is derived from a 95% probability of success-
ful clutter discrimination at an intersection. If we can discriminate subsurface features from
surface clutter at an intersection, we know that the extension of the reﬂector across both
groundtracks (assuming the reﬂector is continuous) is a subsurface feature and not clutter
(Castelletti et al. 2017; Haynes et al. 2018a;S c a n l a ne ta l .2020).
3.6 RadiometricPrecisionandAccuracy
The radiometric precision requirements ensure the ability to measure relative power, without
azimuth gain, over the required reﬂectometry resolution cell for HF and VHFreﬂectometry.
This requirement allows the statistics to be constrained over the resolution cell, and the


--- PAGE 28 ---
   51 Page28of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
incoherent portion of the energy be measured. The radiometric accuracy requirements ensure
the ability to measure relative power, without azimuth gain, over a REASON ﬂyby for HF
and VHF reﬂectometry. This requirement allows the coherent energy to be compared across
the proﬁle, and thus observe variations in the permittivity of the near-surface. A precision
and accuracy of 1 dB on the HF/VHF signal over length scales of less than or equal to
27.5 km/10 km within a given groundtrack allows us to resolve the coherent and incoherent
energy variations corresponding to the smallest difference in permittivity across the full
range of snow densiﬁcation phases observed in Earth analogs, speciﬁcally the difference
between compact hexagonal ice (reﬂectivity: − 11 dB, permittivity: ∼ 3.15) and ice at pore
close-off (reﬂectivity: − 12 dB, permittivity: ∼ 2.8) (Grima et al. 2014a). We note that there
is uncertainty in the empirical laws used to relate density and permittivity, which could be
addressed by future laboratory measurements (Sect. 9.1.1).
Because the 1-dB precision and accuracy requirement is imposed on the total power mea-
sured by the receiver, this does not represent the precision and accuracy of the coherent and
incoherent power derived from reﬂectometry, which is ultimately governed by the relative
balance of these two quantities. If the coherent and incoherent power are within 5 dB of
each other (coherent/incoherent power ratio between − 5 dB and 5 dB), the uncertainty is
relatively stable and corresponds to a bias on the predicted coherent and incoherent power
of less than 1 dB (Grima et al. 2022b). The spacecraft altitude will also inﬂuence the co-
herent/incoherent balance since geometric spreading affects each term differently (Haynes
et al. 2018b). Additional uncertainty will come from the strategy for absolute radiometric
calibration (e.g., recording returns from well-characterized terrains (Grima et al. 2014a)o r
listening to well-characterized radio noise (Gerekos et al. 2024)).
3.7 RadiometricStability
The radiometric stability requirements ensure the ability to measure relative power for
sounding to track variations in subsurface attenuation, accounting for drifts that could occur
over a ﬂyby and over shortened timescales. Attenuation as a function of depth within the ice
shell can tell us about the structure of heat transfer and compositional variations within the
ice shell (Kalousová et al. 2017). If the ice shell is convecting, radar attenuation rates may
vary along a groundtrack. For a subsurface interface that changes 1 km in depth over tens of
kilometers, a change in attenuation rate of 2 dB/km due to thermal/compositional variations
requires 2 dB radiometric stability.
4 Veriﬁcation&Validation(V&V)forRequirementsonMeasurement
Quality
4.1 OverviewofScienceV&VApproach
Europa’s ice shell is a challenging target from the perspective of developing, verifying,
and validating requirements for an ice-penetrating radar. REASON’s baseline measure-
ment techniques and requirements on measurement quality are sensitive to properties of
Europa, many of which are poorly constrained and continue to be debated. The permittivity
(ε= ε
′ − jε′′) governs the radar signal attenuation, contrasts in permittivity produce reﬂec-
tions, and rough interfaces and the presence of voids can induce scattering losses. These
phenomena govern the ability for a particular measurement to be successful for a given
instrument performance.


--- PAGE 29 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page29of91    51 
Given the lack of constraints on the properties of Europa, an extremely wide parameter
space of possible Europas currently exists. To ensure that REASON requirements on mea-
surement quality are robust for a selection of plausible Europas, we evaluate requirements
in the context of models for Europa consistent with the hypotheses REASON is designed to
test. We represent Europa as 1D models to evaluate all REASON requirements on measure-
ment quality, except for the requirement for interferometric clutter discrimination, because
it is a 2D phenomenon.
Each 1D model is constructed using twelve geophysical regimes that describe Europa
from exosphere to ocean (Sect. 4.2), sampling a range of published scientiﬁc hypotheses
and incorporating Europa’s known properties. Because predictions of Europa’s geophysical
character tend to be bimodal (e.g., thin versus thick ice shell), we deﬁne representative pa-
rameter values for two modes in each regime. Each geophysical regime in a point model
contributes to terms in a 1D link budget that allows for the calculation of the SNR for a
given target interface (Table 3). We include both subsurface water and subsurface structure
as target interfaces and consider an SNR≥ 0 necessary for a Measurement Quality Require-
ment to be met for a possible Europa (i.e., a target interface cannot be studied if it is not
detectable).
Because there is uncertainty in the physical properties of Europa which govern major
loss terms in the 1D link budget (e.g., the surface roughness at radar wavelengths, volume
scattering, and ice shell attenuation), multiple point models are constructed and organized
into Ensembles of Point Models (EPMs) (Sect. 4.3). These EPMs are connected to, but
deﬁned independently from, REASON’s Guiding Science Datasets. EPMs are used to V&V
requirements on measurement quality and to validate requirements at the instrument level
that are used to generate Key Radar Parameters (KRPs). The KRPs serve as a bridge between
REASON Science and System Engineering, translating estimated instrument performance,
including spacecraft-level impingements, to input parameters for verifying requirements on
measurement quality (Sect. 3).
This approach to V&V is adopted to ensure the point models for Europa used to evaluate
requirements are consistent with the hypotheses and measurement techniques associated
with each dataset, since each dataset was deﬁned according to speciﬁc hypothesis tests.
Because the hypotheses are related to the structure and properties of Europa, they imply
the selection of a particular mode for each regime as well as their combinations with other
modes to form an EPM. A single requirement on measurement quality may be evaluated
using multiple EPMs if the requirement traces up to multiple datasets. As a result, a given
requirement on measurement quality may pass for one dataset and fail for another. This
feature of the REASON science veriﬁcation and validation approach allows for enhanced
traceability to evaluate the impact of instrument performance for speciﬁc datasets.
4.2 REASON-RelevantEuropaRegimes
The twelve geophysical regimes and two modes used to represent REASON-sensitive prop-
erties of Europa are summarized in Table 4 and described in Sects. 4.2.1–4.2.10.W ed i v i d e
the geophysical regimes into two classes: one which applies to the surface and near-surface
and another which applies to the subsurface. The near-surface regime modes only vary in the
Altimetry and Reﬂectometry EPM, since the variations in the properties of the near-surface
are not relevant tosounding the subsurface. Two regimes that are not included here are iono-
spheric dispersion and Jovian noise. Ionospheric dispersion causes a proportional delay in
the echo receive time (much greater for HF than VHF) (Grima et al. 2015), and decametric
noise from Jupiter can obscure HF echoes (Cecconi et al. 2012). However, these effects are


--- PAGE 30 ---
   51 Page30of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
Table 3 Terms included in REASON 1D link budget
Link Budget
Term
Description Relevant
Regimes
Reference
Performance,
Operations,
Geometry
Radar
Potential
SNR of a ﬂat, perfect, inﬁnite
reﬂector at a range of 400 km,
assuming SAR processing
– Sect. 4.4.1
Reference
SAR Gain
Gain resulting from SAR
processing at the reference
altitude (400 km)
– Sect. 4.4.4
Reference SAR Gain is
subtracted from Radar
Potential so that SAR Gain can
be recalculated for the altitude
of interest
Geometric
Spreading
Loss due to spreading of the
wavefront, calculated with
respect to the reference
altitude (400 km)
– Schroeder et al.
(2014)
Haynes et al. (2018b)
Flat Europa
Assumption
Loss to account for a spherical
(as opposed to ﬂat) Fresnel
zone area
– Haynes et al. ( 2018b)
Short Chirp Loss associated with a chirp
length (RF pulse width) below
the 200 µs assumed in deriving
the radar potential
–T a b l e 9
SAR Gain Gain resulting from SAR
processing (not applied for
Reﬂectometry)
– Peters et al. ( 2005b)
1-Bit
Sampling
Loss (VHF only) resulting
from recording only the signal
sign below 3 km to conserve
data volume
– Scanlan et al. ( 2020)
Inﬁnite
Mirror
Assumption
Loss to account for spherical
(as opposed to ﬂat) wavefront
– Haynes et al. ( 2018b)
Range Side
Lobe Noise
Loss due to side lobes (Hann
processing window)
– Sect. 4.4.5
mitigated by REASON’s requirements. HF ionospheric delays can be corrected using the
relatively unperturbed VHF, and HF sounding measurements are not required on Europa’s
sub-Jovian hemisphere.
4.2.1 SurfaceRoughness
Surface roughness affects both the coherence and strength of the radar echo reﬂected from
Europa’s surface (i.e., altimetry and ranging), as well as the coherence and strength of the
transmitted signal component that continues to propagate downwards into Europa’s subsur-
face (i.e., sounding) (Schroeder et al. 2015). Reﬂection and transmission losses are quan-
tiﬁed using scattering models applicable to wavelength-scale roughness (Fung et al. 1992)
and are not scaled across the Fresnel zone or pulse-limited footprint.
Data constraining the roughness of Europa’s surface are sparse. High resolution Galileo
images of Europa are rare, and regions of good stereo coverage are even rarer. Although


--- PAGE 31 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page31of91    51 
Table 3 (Continued)
Link Budget
Term
Description Relevant
Regimes
Reference
Europa Surface
Scattering
Loss to due signal scattering
from a rough surface
Surface
Roughness
Fung et al. (1992)
Surface
Transmission
Loss to due signal transmission
through a rough surface
Surface
Roughness
Fung et al. (1992)
Vo l u m e
Scattering
Loss due to volume scattering
from voids in the ice shell
Deep
Regolith
Aglyamov et al.
(2017)
Ice Shell
Attenuation
Loss due to electrical
conductivity of the ice shell
Surface
Temperature
Moore (2000)
Ice Shell
Composition
Ice Shell
Thickness
Basal
Temperature
Interface
Reﬂection
Coefﬁcient
Fresnel reﬂection coefﬁcient at
the target interface
Near-Surface
Density
Mouginot et al.
(2009)
Near-Surface
Composition
Near-Surface
Thickness
Salt Layer
Thickness
Salt Layer
Depth
Subsurface
Water
Interface
Europa’s surface is complex, assessments of DTMs tend to show that there are two dominant
roughness regimes (Nimmo and Schenk 2008; Steinbrügge et al. 2020b): (i) Ridged Plains
(Prockter and Patterson2009) and (ii) Chaotic Terrain (Collins and Nimmo2009). Estimates
for the self-afﬁne structure of Europa’s surface based on the DTMs of Nimmo and Schenk
(2008)( s e eT a b l e1 in Steinbrügge et al. ( 2018)) allowed the roughness estimates to be
scaled to REASON radar wavelengths, yielding the values in Table4.
4.2.2 Near-SurfaceDensity,Composition,andThickness
Europa’s shell is dominated by water ice. The density of the ice will affect the real part of
the permittivity and thus the reﬂection coefﬁcient of the near-surface. We use 910 kg m−3 to
represent nonporous water ice and 518 kg m−3 for porous water ice. The latter mode corre-
sponds to the limit of random loose packing for uniform spheres (Onoda and Liniger 1990)
and is adopted to represent the case of a relatively porous ice using a rigidity percolation
threshold, since observational constraints of the porosity of the near-surface are lacking.
Note that these densities are used to represent porosity and as such their magnitudes are
not necessarily comparable to the density of ice expected at Europa, which could exceed
930 kg m
−3 for nonporous ice at surface temperatures (Carnahan et al. 2021). Also note


--- PAGE 32 ---
   51 Page32of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
Table 4 Geophysical regimes used to build 1D point models of Europa
Regime Mode 1 Mode 2
Surface &
Near-Surface
Surface Roughness Ridged Plains Chaotic Terrain
σHF = 2.2m σHF = 6m
σVHF = 0.5m σVHF = 2.2m
Density Non-Porous Porous
910 kg m −3 518 kg m−3
Composition Clean Ice Brine-Filled Ice
ε= 3.15 ε= 9
Thickness Thin Thick
0.5 m 200 m
Subsurface Deep Regolith Absent Present
Non-Porous 22% Porosity, 22 cm Pore Radius
Surface Temperature Polar Equatorial
50 K 100 K
Ice Shell Composition Pure Marine
0 μMC l− 60 μMC l−
Ice Shell Thickness Thin Thick
3k m 3 0k m
Salt Layer Thickness 0.2 m 1 m
Salt Layer Depth 1/2 Ice Shell Thickness 10 km
Subsurface Water Interface Sharp Mush
Water 30% Ice-Water Mixture
Basal Temperature Melting Temperature Eutectic Temperature
270 K 250 K
that the density imposed for the near-surface does not describe the porosity at depth. The
porosity at depth is deﬁned by the deep regolith regime (Sect. 4.2.3), which governs total
integrated volume-scattering losses.
We deﬁne two modes for near-surface composition: (i) clean ice ( ε= 3.15) and (ii)
brine-ﬁlled ice (ε= 9). The permittivity for brine-ﬁlled ice corresponds to an empirically-
determined value for the near-surface layer of brine-saturated ﬁrn of the McMurdo Ice Shelf,
Antarctica, calculated from the brine zone reﬂectance of− 6 dB shown in Figure S3 of Grima
et al. (2016). Brine-saturated ﬁrn in Antarctica represents an analog for brine-ﬁlled ice that
could be present in the near-surface of Europa (Schmidt et al. 2011). Although such brines
would be transient in nature and not expected to remain liquid under near-surface Europan
conditions (Vu et al. 2016; Thomas et al. 2017), their detection would be scientiﬁcally rele-
vant for a potential future lander mission and could represent a potential habitat (Pappalardo
et al. 2013; Wolfenbarger et al. 2022c). The presence of fossil brines (i.e., salt hydrates) is
not represented here since the inﬂuence of porosity on the near-surface reﬂection coefﬁcient
dominates over the presence of impurities, except when liquid brine is present.
The near-surface thickness can inﬂuence the reﬂection coefﬁcient if the layer thickness is
on the order of wavelength scale (Lalich et al. 2022; Scanlan et al. 2022; Lauro et al. 2023).


--- PAGE 33 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page33of91    51 
Incident and reﬂected waves within a thin layer can interfere constructively or destructively,
depending on the permittivity and thickness of the thin layer (Mouginot et al. 2009). We
deﬁne two modes for the thickness of the near-surface layer: (i) 0.5 m and (ii) 200 m. The
0.5-m surface layer mode is deﬁned from observations of Europa’s surface using S-band
Earth-based radar (Black et al. 2001), consistent with modeled estimates of the gardened
layer thickness (Costello et al. 2021). The 200 m surface layer mode corresponds to the
thickness equal to the height of a typical Europan ridge (Head et al. 1999).
4.2.3 DeepRegolith
The presence of volume-scatterers within the ice shell, referred to here as deep regolith,
could inﬂuence the radar signal penetration depth. An early study of volume scattering losses
found that regolith at depth would pose an “insurmountable obstacle” to radar sounding of
Europa’s ice shell (Eluszkiewicz 2004). A follow-on study determined these estimates were
“unduly pessimistic” and found that much of the range of estimated volume scattering losses
due to regolith at depth are minor at Europa for both HF and VHF frequencies (Aglyamov
et al. 2017). They found large losses for the VHF at high porosities (>10%) when void size
was large (>22 cm); however, losses were insigniﬁcant for the HF. These extreme values
are consistent with the porosity needed to generate observed positive band topography in
the case of a thin ice shell (Nimmo et al. 2003). We adopt two modes to represent volume
scattering losses due to the presence of deep regolith: (i) a 22% porosity regolith with 22 cm
pore radius, which correspond to upper bounds of the parameter space deﬁning regolith
porosity and size considered in Aglyamov et al. ( 2017), and (ii) nonporous ice. The upper
bound in regolith loss is intended to represent conditions where the VHF band is unable to
make sounding measurements and as such represents conditions that could be considered
extreme relative to other models for the porosity of Europa’s ice shell at depth.
4.2.4 SurfaceTemperature
Surface temperatures affect the equilibrium conductive ice shell temperature proﬁle, which
in turn affects the attenuation. As Fig. 10 demonstrates, higher ice shell temperatures result
in higher signal attenuation. To ﬁrst order, Europa’s surface temperature is driven by lat-
itude. We adopt estimates for the mean annual equatorial and polar surface temperatures,
consistent with those used in previous models for radar attenuation in Europa’s ice shell
(Chyba et al. 1998; Moore 2000). Values are consistent with those obtained from numerical
thermal models of Europa’s ice shell that account for moderate internal heat ﬂow and second
order inﬂuences related to orbital geometry (Ashkenazy 2019). Unlike other regimes, point
models are evaluated for both surface temperature modes since observations span multiple
latitudes over a ﬂyby. Polar surface temperatures translate to a less attenuating ice column
and thus more optimistic performance. Although an equatorial temperature represents the
conservative endmember from the perspective of radar signal attenuation, we evaluate both
surface temperatures to ensure that the inﬂuence of latitude on success or failure of a point
model is tracked.
4.2.5 IceShellComposition
Bulk ice shell composition is represented by two regime modes: (i) pure ice and (ii) ma-
rine ice. These modes represent the impurity contribution to the high-frequency electrical
conductivity of ice, which governs radar signal attenuation in ice (Moore 2000; MacGregor


--- PAGE 34 ---
   51 Page34of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
et al. 2007, 2015). Note that only lattice-soluble impurities (impurities that are incorpo-
rated within the ice crystal lattice and not accommodated interstitially) contribute to the
high-frequency electrical conductivity of ice. On Europa, chloride is thought to be the most
ubiquitous and dominant lattice-soluble impurity (Grimm and Stillman 2019; Moore 2000),
incorporated through entertainment of oceanic material at the ice–ocean interface (Buffo
et al. 2020; Wolfenbarger et al. 2022a). Note that sulfate, which has been predicted to be
a dominant constituent of Europa’s ocean (Kargel 1991; Zolotov and Shock 2001), is not
lattice-soluble in ice (Pettinelli et al. 2016; Grimm and Stillman 2019; Moore 2000). Sim-
ilarly, radiolytically generated sulfuric acid (Carlson et al. 1999, 2002), concentrated along
Europa’s trailing hemisphere (Fischer et al. 2015; Ligier et al. 2016;T r u m b oe ta l .2020),
is not expected at depth in the ice column. Impactor material is not represented as an ice
shell impurity because it is not expected to contribute to the electrical conductivity or be
present in high enough volume fraction to contribute to volume-scattering losses, with the
possible exception of impact crater ejecta (Schenk and McKinnon 1991; Tomlinson and
Hayne 2022). The electrical properties of ice used to model the attenuation rate in Fig. 10
are adopted from Moore et al. ( 1994) and are comparable with values typically used in ra-
dioglaciology (MacGregor et al. 2007, 2015). The marine ice chlorinity mode (60 μM) was
derived from the modeled Europa K1a ocean composition of Zolotov and Shock (2001)a n d
the equilibrium solute distribution coefﬁcient of Gross et al. (1977).
4.2.6 IceShellThickness
There has been considerable controversy in estimating the thickness of Europa’s ice shell. A
full discussion on estimates for the thickness of Europa’s ice shell can be found in Howell
(2021), Nimmo and Manga (2009), and Billings and Kattenhorn (2005). From the perspec-
tive of sounding in the REASON investigation, we are interested in the thickness of the cold,
thermally conductive lid, where the relatively low temperature results in minimal radar sig-
nal attenuation (Fig. 10). This may also include cold downwellings associated with a slowly
convecting ice layer below the thermally conductive lid (Kalousová et al.2017). We consider
two modes for ice shell thickness: (i) a thin ice layer extending to 3 km depth, and (ii) a thick
ice layer extending to 30 km depth. The thin ice layer mode represents multiple hypotheses
including: a thin global ice shell directly over an ocean — hypothesized based on chaos
block elevations and crack geometry (Greenberg et al. 1999), local regions of thin ice over
water lenses within a thicker ice shell (Schmidt et al.2011), and a thin conductive layer over
convecting ice (Mitri and Showman2005). The thick conductive layer accommodates upper
bound estimates from mechanical models, impact cratering analyses, and thermodynamic
analyses (Billings and Kattenhorn 2005) and is compatible with the current best estimate of
10.4 km obtained by Howell (2021).
4.2.7 SaltLayerThicknessandDepth
Salt layers represent a form of possible structure within the ice shell, and thus a potential
target interface. Recent works have modeled the formation of salt layers from the freezing
of ocean-injected sills and found salt layers on the order of meters thick (Buffo et al. 2020;
Chivers et al. 2021). Here we consider two processes for the formation of a sill: (i) the
generation of melt from native ice shell material (Schmidt et al.2011) and (ii) injection from
a subsurface ocean (Michaut and Manga 2014). Because the bulk ice shell salinity is likely
to be over an order of magnitude less saline than the ocean (Buffo et al.2020; Wolfenbarger
et al. 2022a), a salt layer formed from melt is likely to be an order of magnitude thinner


--- PAGE 35 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page35of91    51 
than one formed from ocean water (e.g., 0.2 m vs. 1 m, respectively). We adopt ε= 5t o
represent the permittivity of the hydrated salt layer (Grimm et al.2008; Pettinelli et al.2016;
Grimm and Stillman 2019). We position salt layers formed from ice shell melt 10 km from
the surface, consistent with a maximum measured topographic relief ( ∼=6k m )a n di n f e r r e d
freeboard (∼=4 km) over Thera Macula (Schmidt et al.2011). We position salt layers formed
from ocean water halfway through the ice shell, consistent with estimates for the base of an
elastic layer within an ice shell, thought to be important for sill emplacement (Michaut and
Manga 2014).
4.2.8 SubsurfaceWaterInterface
Two modes are used for determining the reﬂection coefﬁcient associated with a subsurface
water interface: (i) water and (ii) mush. The water mode represents ﬂat, pure ice over ter-
restrial seawater (Peters et al. 2005b). The mush mode represents ﬂat, pure ice over a 30%
ice-water mixture. The latter mode is intended to represent the reﬂection coefﬁcient from a
eutectic interface within the ice column, consistent with the sharp interface in Culha et al.
(2020). Physically, the mush case represents the transition across the eutectic temperature,
where melt becomes stable (Zolotov and Shock 2001; Zolotov and Kargel 2009; Wolfen-
barger et al. 2022b). We do not include a model for a gradient in liquid volume fraction.
REASON is not designed to penetrate an increasingly mushy brine layer, which would be
highly electrically conductive and thus attenuating to radar (Stillman et al. 2018). Although
penetration of a mushy layer is unlikely, the properties that cause the layer to be high loss in
turn make the eutectic interface (the top of the mushy layer) more reﬂective and thus easier
to detect. The eutectic interface represents a proxy for an ice–ocean interface allowing for
total ice shell thickness and thermophysical structure to be constrained.
4.2.9 BasalTemperature
We use two modes for the basal temperature: (i) the predicted melting point of pure water
ice, which is approximately 270 K beneath a range of hypothesized ice shell thicknesses
on Europa (Melosh et al. 2004), and (ii) the eutectic temperature of aqueous NaCl, which
is approximately 250 K. Changes in basal temperature inﬂuence the temperature proﬁle
within the ice column, particularly near the basal interface. The temperature proﬁle directly
inﬂuences the radar signal attenuation in ice, given the nonlinear temperature dependence
of radar signal attenuation in ice.
4.2.10 CoupledRegimes
Certain regimes are coupled, either due to physical constraints or to represent speciﬁc hy-
potheses. The character of a subsurface water interface is thermodynamically constrained
and as such is coupled to the basal temperature. Because we deﬁne mush as a eutectic
boundary and consider salt to be the only non-ice impurity, we couple this mode to a basal
temperature of 250 K, which is consistent with the eutectic temperature of an aqueous NaCl
solution. A pure ice–water interface is only thermodynamically stable at the melting tem-
perature, and as such this mode is coupled to a basal temperature of 270 K (i.e., the approx-
imate melting temperature for pure ice). Since diapirism is considered to be the mechanism
for generating melt in a thick ice shell, a 0.2-m-thick salt layer is only considered stable for
a thick ice layer. The 1-m-thick salt layers can exist in both the thick and thin ice layer cases,
since the formation mechanism for the sill involves fracture and injection which could occur
in either a thin shell or thick shell case.


--- PAGE 36 ---
   51 Page36of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
4.3 EnsemblesofPointModels(EPMs)
There are four EPMs used to V&V REASON requirements on measurement quality for
sounding, reﬂectometry,a n daltimetry (Table 5). Note that the requirement for interferome-
try is veriﬁed through evaluation of the interfero-metric11 KRP (Sect. 4.4.7).
These EPMs are represented graphically in Fig. 12 and detailed in Tables 12–14 in the
Appendix.
Table 5 EPMs used to evaluate REASON requirements on measurement quality
EPM Measurements Datasets Altitudes
Shallow Subsurface Structure Sounding Shallow Subsurface ≤400 km
Full Depth Subsurface Exchange Sounding Full Depth Subsurface Exchange ≤400 km
Ice Shell Properties Sounding Ice–Ocean Interface ≤400 km (VHF)
≤1000 km (HF)
Altimetry and Reﬂectometry Altimetry and
Reﬂectometry
Shallow Subsurface ≤400 km
Full Depth Subsurface Exchange
Near-Surface Properties
Ice–Ocean Interface ≤1000 km
Fig.12 EPMs used to represent Europa for evaluating Measurement Quality Requirements
11The term “interfero-metric” was adopted to convey that this KRP is a metric used to verify the REASON
measurement technique of interferometry, hence the distinct spelling from the adjective interferometric.


--- PAGE 37 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page37of91    51 
Each point model in the EPM is intended to represent a speciﬁc hypothesis, considered
by the REASON team as part of instrument development. The point models in the Shallow
Subsurface Structure EPM are represented in the Full Depth Subsurface Exchange EPM but
include modiﬁcations to either the basal temperature and/or the ice shell thickness. In the
Shallow Subsurface Structure and Full Depth Subsurface Exchange EPMs, the last six point
models are the same as the ﬁrst six but include salt layers as the target interface, as opposed
to an ice–water interface.
A requirement on measurement quality is considered veriﬁed and validated if the mea-
surement is successful for a majority of the point models in an EPM given performance
derived from KRPs/instrument-level requirements. EPMs are used to verify and validate
that the requirements on measurement quality are capable of “characterizing” and “search-
ing” where applicable (Table 1). Where a Measurement Requirement traces up to a dataset
that involves “characterizing” or “mapping” a property of Europa, the requirement must be
met for both a subsurface structure target, represented by salt layers, and a subsurface wa-
ter target interface. Where a Measurement Requirement traces up to a dataset that involves
searching for features at Europa, we consider the requirement met for either a subsurface
structure or subsurface water target interface.
4.4 KeyRadarParameters(KRPs)
The KRPs are supplied by the REASON System Engineering team to the REASON science
veriﬁcation and validation (SVV) team. KRPs translate estimated instrument performance
(including spacecraft-level impingements) and are used as an input for REASON SVV . Cur-
rent Best Estimate (CBE) values are used to verify requirements on measurement quality,
whereas the values derived from instrument-level requirements are used for validation.
Not all KRPs are needed to evaluate a particular requirement on measurement quality. Ta-
ble 6 presents the types of requirements on measurement quality evaluated in REASON SVV
and the KRPs that contribute to their veriﬁcation and validation. Radar potential (Sect.4.4.1)
and SAR gain (Sect. 4.4.4) are included in the evaluation of all requirements. Analysis of
the center frequency uncertainty (Sect. 4.4.2) is used to justify the assumption in SVV that
the center frequency corresponds to the required value. Vertical resolution (Sect. 4.4.3)i s
converted to an effective bandwidth in SVV and used to evaluate all vertical resolution and
vertical precision requirements. The Normalized Side Lobe Envelope (NSLE) (Sect. 4.4.5)
is used to evaluate all requirements that apply to the subsurface.
4.4.1 RadarPotential
Radar potential is deﬁned as the SNR of a ﬂat, perfect, inﬁnite reﬂector at a range of 400 km,
with no environmental perturbations (e.g., neglecting the ionosphere). Radar potential in-
cludes terms for the gain resulting from SAR processing as well as impacts from instrumen-
tal effects and capabilities.
4.4.2 CenterFrequencyUncertainty
Center frequency uncertainty quantiﬁes the variation in center frequency expected over the
mission. Uncertainty in the center frequency represents uncertainty in the STAble Local
Oscillator (STALO) clock, and thus the uncertainty in measuring the time between chirp
transmission and echo receive, which can feed into altimetry and ranging errors.


--- PAGE 38 ---
   51 Page38of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
Table 6 Key Radar Parameters (KRPs) used to verify REASON requirements on measurement quality
Key Radar Parameters (KRPs)
Radar
Potential
Center
Frequency
Uncertainty
Vertical
Resolution
SAR
Gain
NSLE Radiometric
Stability
Interfero-
metric
Requirements
on
Measurement
Quality
Blind Zone
(3.2.1.)
×× × ×
Vertical
Resolution
(3.2.2.)
×× × ×
Vertical
Precision
(3.2.2.)
×× × × ×
Along-Track
Resolution
(3.2.3.)
×× ×
Sampled
Along-Track
Resolution
(3.2.4.)
××
Clutter
Discrimination
(3.2.5.)
××
Radiometric
Precision
(3.2.6.)
×× ×
Radiometric
Accuracy
(3.2.6.)
×× ×
Radiometric
Stability
(3.2.7.)
×× × ×
4.4.3 VerticalResolution
Vertical resolution in vacuum is an instrument-level requirement and can be used to calculate
an effective bandwidth. It is taken as the 3 dB width of the main peak lobe in vacuum after
range compression. A Hann window is used to reduce the impact of the range side lobes
(see the NSLE below in Sect. 4.4.5), but results in broadening of the peak lobe and loss of
resolution. In operational processing, other windowing functions may be used.
4.4.4 SARGain
SAR Gain is the gain obtained from focused SAR processing at 400 km, assuming an
aperture length equal to the Fresnel zone radius. The scatterer is assumed to be a specular
(smooth/ﬂat) surface at nadir. Reﬂectometry measurements do not beneﬁt from SAR gain
since the technique depends on analysis of the returns with minimal azimuth processing.


--- PAGE 39 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page39of91    51 
Fig.13 NSLE
4.4.5 NormalizedSideLobeEnvelope(NSLE)
The NSLE is used to describe artifacts generated during the range compression of the sur-
face echo and is illustrated in Fig. 13. In order to minimize side lobe power levels, range
compression of the reﬂected chirps is typically performed using a windowed version of the
reference chirp, here assumed to be a Hann window. Range compression with a windowed
reference chirp leads to a steep decrease in the power of undesirable side lobes on either
side of the surface echo that eventually reaches a minimum at some range (i.e., the “near-in”
position). At ranges beyond the near-in position, side lobe power levels will begin to in-
crease and eventually reach a local maximum (i.e., the “far-out” position). The NSLE KRP
describes the range and relative power of the near-in minimum side lobe power as well as
the far-out local maximum. The near-in portion of the NSLE KRP is used in the analysis of
the REASON blind zone requirement while the far-out, if above the noise ﬂoor, is used to
calculate a reduction in the SNR of echoes from subsurface targets. The absolute power lev-
els associated with the near-in and far-out NSLE KRP are scaled relative to the strength of
the surface echo. The near-in and far-out formulation is only relevant for cases with modest
electromagnetic interference (EMI) and radio frequency interference (RFI).
4.4.6 RadiometricStability
The radiometric stability KRP quantiﬁes the expected variation in power across a ﬂyby
caused by temperature variations, calibration errors, and other instrument-related phenom-
ena. The radiometric stability KRP includes metrics for both a radiometric precision (short
term) and radiometric accuracy (over a ﬂyby). The radiometric stability KRP is used to
evaluate requirements related to radiometric stability, precision, and accuracy. There are
no radiometric stability KRPs or requirements for longer periods. The radiometric stability
KRPs do not include imaging geometry effects.
4.4.7 Interfero-Metric
Unlike the other KRPs, the interfero-metric includes geophysical effects. The interfero-
metric KRP quantiﬁes whether interferometry is successful for a given point model at a
speciﬁc altitude. The point models used in generating the interfero-metric include all those
in the Shallow Subsurface Structure and Full Depth Subsurface Exchange EPMs that have
target depths less than or equal to 3 km. For point models with salt layers, the salt layer depth
is swept from the blind zone down to 3 km in 10-m increments. To assess whether interfer-
ometry is successful, both detection and discrimination must be evaluated. For each point
model, the SNR and interferometric phase of both the target and the clutter source is calcu-
lated. The central assumptions for the interfero-metric are that a subsurface target or surface


--- PAGE 40 ---
   51 Page40of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
target is present, but never both, and that the subsurface target has a 10 km extent along-
track. A feature is considered “detected” if its SNR is above a certain threshold, deﬁned as
0 dB, consistent with the detection criteria for evaluation of other REASON Measurement
Quality Requirements. A feature is considered “discriminated” if the expected value of its
interferometric phase can reliably be determined to be below or above a given threshold.
The roughness of either the nadir or off-nadir extended target will cause a spreading of the
phase of the backscattered echo. As such, the interferometric phase can be described by a
statistical distribution. Because of this, statistical criteria are used to establish whether the
interferometric phase is above or below the threshold.
5 InstrumentDesign
5.1 DescriptionofRadarFunctions,ArchitectureandOperation
The radar consists of three stacks which reside inside the spacecraft vault: Digital and Syn-
thesizer Electronics Stacks (DSES) that includes two redundant Digital and Synthesizer
Electronics (DSE-A and DSE-B) units with cross-strapped interfaces to the Radio Frequency
(RF) electronics. This allows for radar operation during the mission to be tolerant to sin-
gle DSE faults. Each DSE includes a Frequency Synthesizer and Digital and Power Unit
(DPU). The DPU consists of a Radar Acquisition & Management Board (RAMBo) and a
DSE Power Converter Unit (DSEPCU) that powers the RAMBo and the Synthesizer. The
RF Electronics System (RFES) for REASON is divided into HF and VHF Stacks. Each
stack includes the receive and transmit electronics.
The Antenna Subsystem (AS) is located outside of the vault and is mounted on the Solar
Arrays (SA). The AS is an integrated array including two 17.6-m HF dipole antenna assem-
blies and four 2.76-m VHF folded dipole antenna assemblies. Each antenna assembly in the
array contains a radiating element and an impedance Matching Network (MN) to transform
the RF front-end nominal 50-ohm characteristic impedance to the impedance of each radi-
ating element. The antenna assemblies are designated with “+X” (Starboard side) or “–X”
(Port side), as well as “inner” or “outer” for the VHF, to identify their location on either
solar array wing. Coaxial cable assemblies, both semi-rigid and ﬂexible, are used to connect
the antenna assemblies to the vault electronics. The antenna assemblies are scheduled for
deployment roughly one month after launch. A rendering of the Europa Clipper spacecraft
with REASON’s AS is shown in Fig. 14.
Figure 15 shows the functional block diagram of the REASON 9- and 60-MHz ice-
penetrating radar, showing the frequency plan and transmit-receive signal ﬂow. Coherent
radar signals are derived from: 1) a 48-MHz STALO for synchronizing radar control-and-
timing, analog-to-digital conversion, onboard processing and data compression of received
echoes; and 2) a frequency-multiplied 192-MHz clock for the digital chirp generation and
digital-to-analog conversion of transmit pulses. Given the relatively low HF and VHF fre-
quencies involved, all transmit frequency generation and receive downconversion is done
completely in the digital electronics, without the need for upconversion or downconver-
sion in the RF section. The digital electronics design uses a single, reconﬁgurable ﬁeld-
programmable gate array (FPGA). The FPGA ﬁrmware architecture is state-machine-based
and does not require a ﬂight computer module or ﬂight software. The radar Control and Tim-
ing Unit (CTU) ﬁrmware component orchestrates the measurement sequence during a Eu-
ropa ﬂyby through a programmable Observation Plan (OP) script ﬁle stored in the RAMBo’s
Static Random Access Memory (SRAM). For a given ﬂyby, the spacecraft uploads the OP


--- PAGE 41 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page41of91    51 
Fig.14 Depiction of Europa Clipper spacecraft with REASON antenna assemblies
Fig.15 REASON functional block diagram
contents to SRAM and initiates science data collection via a SpaceWire command. When
data collection starts during the approach, the CTU plays out a deterministic sequence of
radar transmit and receive events as deﬁned by the OP, with radar parameters updated once


--- PAGE 42 ---
   51 Page42of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
Table 7 REASON radar system parameters (actuals)
HF VHF
Peak Transmit Power at input to the antennas,
per antenna assembly
11.75 W 5.5 W
Center Frequency 9 MHz 60 MHz
Bandwidth (Fractional Bandwidth) 1 MHz (11%) 10 MHz (17%)
Operational Altitudes 25 km to 1000 km from Europa
Pulse Repetition Frequency (PRF) 50 Hz–3 kHz
Approximate On-time per Orbit 20 min warm-up and 16 min science collection
Dynamic Range 40 dB* 35 dB*
Antenna Gain at Nadir 4 dBi* 7.3 dBi
Mass 65.7 kg
AveragePower 61 W
*Requirement or CBE at time of publication.
every few-second dwell interval. The FPGA processes, assembles, and packetizes REA-
SON science data and engineering telemetry and sends these data back to the spacecraft via
SpaceWire for downlink.
The RF front-end architecture for HF and VHF electronics stacks (HFS, VHFS) uses
a high-efﬁciency Gallium Nitride (GaN) power ampliﬁer plus Transmit/Receive (T/R)
switches with coupled transmit-loopback calibration signal injection back into each of three
receiver channels (single-channel HF and dual-channel interferometric “+X/–X” VHF).
Loopback provides a calibration reference to compensate in post-processing for any RF
transmitter/receiver ampliﬁer gain variations over the ﬂyby collection period. T/R pulses are
distributed through front-end power combiners-dividers, through a network of six coaxial
feedlines to the two HF and four VHF antenna assemblies. A summary of radar system pa-
rameters is shown in Table 7, and a block diagram of the overall REASON architecture is
s h o w ni nF i g .16.
5.1.1 JovianEnvironmentasaDesignDriverforREASON
A major driver for REASON’s design was the challenging Jovian radiation environment
(Kim et al. 2019). Parts and materials were selected with total ionizing dose (TID) in mind
such that REASON will survive and perform throughout the mission design life. Internal
electrostatic discharges (IESD), caused by dielectric materials accumulating charge in the
environment and then discharging, were also an important consideration. IESD poses both
a damage risk and a data quality risk to REASON, and both effects were factored into the
design choices for REASON. In general, all non-metallic materials were either tested or an-
alytically assessed for their suitability for use in the expected radiation environment. Elec-
tron beam testing was conducted at either the Jet Propulsion Laboratory (JPL) Dynamitron
(Pasadena, CA) or at the Goddard Space Flight Center (GSFC) Radiation Effects Facility
(Greenbelt, MD).
In order for REASON to survive and avoid damage from the worst-case IESD event,
which could either be generated by the instrument itself or by another part of the spacecraft
and coupled into the instrument via the antennas, dielectric materials had to be carefully
selected, particularly in the antenna assemblies, as they are located on the solar arrays and


--- PAGE 43 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page43of91    51 
Fig.16 REASON implementation block diagram
relatively exposed to the Jovian environment (Sect. 5.2.3). Furthermore, REASON needed
to be hardened to the worst-case potential discharges that it might experience during the
mission. To this end, the MNs underwent a thorough qualiﬁcation campaign to demonstrate
that they will be able to survive a 1-kV , worst-case event.
Additionally, REASON is sensitive to low-amplitude IESD events that would not other-
wise pose a damage risk to electronic hardware. A high rate of these events has the potential
to affect radar performance and effectively inject noise into the science data collected. REA-
SON has determined that it can tolerate a 5% data loss; this corresponds to 436 IESD events
per second. Discharges from both within REASON as well as the entirety of the spacecraft
must be accounted for, and a total bounding discharge rate across the spacecraft is bookkept
to ensure that it will be tolerable for REASON’s performance. This was also an important
consideration in the materials selection for REASON.
5.2 RadarSubsystems
5.2.1 DigitalElectronicsSubsystem
The REASON Digital Electronics Subsystem (DES) consists of three main boards housed in
a common chassis: the DSEPCU, the synthesizer, and the RAMBo. As described previously,
there is an A- and B-side for DSE redundancy. In addition to interfacing with the spacecraft,


--- PAGE 44 ---
   51 Page44of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
Table 8 DES parameters Parameter HF VHF
ADC sampling rate 48 MHz
Complex-valued baseband sampling rate 1.2 MHz 12 MHz
Downconverter center frequency 9 MHz 12 MHz
ADC bit resolution 9-10 bits (effective)
the primary purpose of the REASON digital subsystem is to coherently transmit chirps, re-
ceive the echoes, and reduce the receive data rate and data volume, while preserving the
SNR necessary for science. The radar’s operation is controlled by the OP sequence ﬁle. The
OP deﬁnes when the radar transmits chirps, when it collects receive data (transmit loop-
back or receive echoes) and conﬁgures the receive data processing. An OP is constructed
on the ground, with operating parameters determined by the ﬂyby trajectory, science goals,
SpaceWire maximum data rate, and spacecraft storage constraints. The radar’s CTU pro-
cesses the OP to generate transmit signals to the RF interfaces, trigger collection of receive
echoes, and send processing parameters to the on-board processor (OBP). The OBP per-
forms digital downconversion, ﬁltering, and decimation of the receive echoes, reducing the
sampling rate from 48 MHz at the analog-to-digital converters (ADCs) to complex-valued
baseband sampling rates of 1.2 MHz for HF and 12 MHz for VHF. The receive data are
optionally coherently summed (to reduce the data rate); the number of coherently summed
echoes is commandable up to 255 for transmit loopback or up to 40 for receive echoes.
Coherent summing is enabled by round-trip delay tracking logic that aligns receive echoes
to within a fraction of a sample. The coherently summed echoes are then compressed us-
ing Block Floating-Point Quantization (BFPQ), which is similar to quantization algorithms
used in previous planetary missions (Kwok and Johnson 1989). It is a vector quantizer
that generates an 8-bit exponent code (power estimate) for a block of samples, and lower
bit-width mantissa codes for each complex-valued baseband sample within the block. The
BFPQ block size is programmable, as is the number of bits per mantissa sample. As an ex-
ample of the data compression performance, the BFPQ input data rate for VHF is 576 Mbps
(12 MHz × (24 + 24)), while the output data rate for a block size of 32 and 4-bit mantissa
codes is 99 Mbps (12 MHz × (32 × (4 + 4) + 8)/32), i.e., a reduction of around six times,
while maintaining a signal-to-quantization noise ratio of over 20 dB. During the ﬂyby, the
mantissa bit-width is adjusted to capture the expected SNR, i.e., lower bit-widths at higher
altitudes, and higher bit-widths at lower altitudes. During a ﬂyby the radar digital subsystem
generates hundreds of science packets per second (for about a dozen unique science packet
types), along with health and status and engineering packets once per second. A summary
of DES parameters is shown in Table 8.
DigitalandSynthesizerElectronicsStacks(DSES) Within each DSE, the synthesizer gener-
ates the 48 MHz and 192 MHz clocks used by the radar and was built by Wenzel Associates
(Austin, TX). The RAMBo was built by L3 Harris (Mason, OH) and utilizes the Xilinx
Virtex-5QV radiation-hardened FPGA. The digital-to-RF transmit interface is implemented
using a 4-bit, 384 MHz sample rate (192 MHz double-data-rate) Digital-to-Analog converter
(DAC) R-2R resistive ladder network, with separate interfaces for HF and VHF chirp gen-
eration. The RF-to-digital receive interface is implemented using three STMicroelectronics
RHF1201 12-bit ADCs operated at 48 MHz to sample the HF, VHF+X, and VHF-X re-
ceiver outputs. The Spacecraft interface is implemented using a 192 Mbps SpaceWire inter-
face, and a low-voltage differential signaling (LVDS) discrete input that controls the FPGA


--- PAGE 45 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page45of91    51 
conﬁguration source. The FPGA conﬁgures from one of two Honeywell 64 Mbit magnetore-
sistive random-access memories (MRAMs). The current plan is for both MRAMs to launch
with identical conﬁgurations: one MRAM is read-only, while the other can be updated post-
launch. The RAMBo also contains a telemetry ADC, analog multiplexers, current sources,
and buffer ampliﬁers for measuring voltages, currents, and temperatures from the RFES,
DSEPCU, synthesizer, and itself. Telemetry is averaged and reported once per second.
DigitalandSynthesizerElectronicsPowerConverterUnit(DSEPCU) The DSEPCU converts
the spacecraft voltage into six voltage outputs (isolated from the spacecraft bus) to the Syn-
thesizer and RAMBo. It shares a chassis with the RAMBo and interfaces with it directly
via an HMM connector. The DSEPCU contains standard housekeeping functions such as
an undervoltage lockout, voltage and current telemetry of its outputs, and an EMI ﬁlter. It
also mitigates concerns that come with a high radiation environment. The 300 krad TID en-
vironment drove the design of the ﬂyback and buck converters due to the limited selection
of pulse-width modulation (PWM) controllers at this dose. The DSEPCU includes a remote
sense for the 1-V rail to increase the voltage accuracy delivered to the RAMBo by com-
pensating for the voltage drop along the high-current path. It also contains a dual ﬂyback
output that shares a feedback network. A key function of the DSEPCU is to provide power
sequencing. To ensure the proper powering off and on, digital logic is used. Additionally,
discharge circuits and robust energy storage are used to guarantee the power off sequencing
under worst case loading.
Synthesizer Assembly The Synthesizer Assembly (Synth) generates 48 MHz and
192 MHz clock signals from a single 48 MHz temperature-stabilized oscillator circuit. The
oven maintains the temperature of the crystal at a ﬁxed temperature to provide excellent
phase noise and frequency accuracy performance over the entire ﬂight temperature range.
In addition to providing temperature telemetry, the Synth provides an oven status indicator
to the DPU that is used to monitor the health of the Synth.
5.2.2 RadioFrequencyElectronicsSubsystem(RFES)
The RFES includes the HF and VHF electronics stacks. Figures 17 and 18 show block dia-
grams for the HFS and VHFS, and the key requirements for the RFES are listed in Table 9.
The electronics for the two frequencies are independent to increase the fault tolerance of
the system. Each RF electronics stack consists of a Transmit Driver Assembly (TxDA), a
Power Ampliﬁcation Unit (PAU), Receiver (Rx) and an RF Power Supply Unit (RFPSU).
The HF Stack consists of one receiver, while the VHF Stack includes 2 receiver assemblies
for across-track interferometric measurements. The TxDA consists of a bandpass ﬁlter and
an ampliﬁer operating in saturation that drives the PAU. A GaN device-based power ampli-
ﬁer operating in a Class-D conﬁguration, a PIN diode T/R switch, and a discrete-element
Wilkinson power divider form the transmit path of the PAU. A directional coupler in the
T/R switch provides a calibration path to sample the transmitted pulse. The T/R switch also
includes a bandpass ﬁlter and RF limiter on the receive path to protect the downstream re-
ceiver electronics from any potential IESD generated by the out-of-vault elements of the
radar and spacecraft.
The Rx electronics includes low noise ampliﬁcation stages and the noise bandwidth ﬁl-
ters. The Rx electronics also includes a switch that selects between the receive path from
the T/R switch and the calibration path. Suitable digital attenuators are included in the Rx
electronics to maximize the dynamic range of the system to allow operation over a wide
range of altitudes during a ﬂyby.
JPL designed a Power Supply Unit (PSU) for the HF and VHF RF electronics. The mag-
netic ampliﬁer (magamp) topology of the PSU was chosen to reduce challenges of qualifying


--- PAGE 46 ---
   51 Page46of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
Fig.17 HF RF In-vault block
diagram



--- PAGE 47 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page47of91    51 
Fig.18 VHF RF In-vault block diagram


--- PAGE 48 ---
   51 Page48of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
Table 9 Key RFES requirements
Requirement HF VHF
Operating Center Frequency 9 MHz 60 MHz
Bandwidth 1 MHz 10 MHz
Peak Transmit Power 7.5 W (min) at each antenna 3.75 W (min) at each antenna
Pulse Droop <0.005 dB/μs <0.005 dB/μs
Pulse Ripple Over Bandwidth <1d B <1d B
Harmonic Rejection >80 dBc >80 dBc
Noise Figure <13.5 dB* <13.5 dB*
Receive Path Gain 49 .5 ± 2.5d B 5 9 .5 ± 0.25 dB
Amplitude Balance <0.3 dB <0.3 dB
Phase Balance <3d e g <3d e g
Differential Phase Stability N/A <2d e g
Amplitude Stability Outside Calibration Loop <0.4 dB <0.4 dB
RF Pulse Width 10 μs to 236 μs2 5 μs to 200 μs
Duty Cycle 10% max 10% max
*Requirement driven by Jovian noise
components in a harsh radiation environment. The primary inductor in the magamp is opti-
mized for saturation and serves as the switch operated at 150 kHz. A reset circuit in the PSU
resets the magamp on a cycle per cycle basis to transition from a saturated state. Magamps
inherently are low noise since there are no EMI spikes associated with ﬁeld-effect transistor
(FET) switching in typical converter topologies. The PSU provides ﬁve independent outputs
including the primary pulse output to the RF electronics. A key challenge solved on the PSU
magnetics was compression of the core by potting and coating resulting in voltage drop out
due to a change in the squareness of the ratio of magnetic ﬂux density to magnetic ﬁeld
strength (B/H).
5.2.3 AntennaSubsystem(AS)
The REASON AS consists of the HF and VHF antennas and their respective Matching
Networks.
Antennas The REASON antennas were built by Heliospace Corporation in Berkeley, Cal-
ifornia. Heliospace was also responsible for the mechanical design of the antennas, while
JPL was responsible for the RF design of the antennas and antenna arrays. The antennas con-
sist of beryllium copper Spiral Tube and Actuator for Controlled Extension and Retraction
(STACER) elements that deploy due to their own push force. When deployed, STACERs
have a similar bending stiffness to a thin-walled tube, but they stow into a compact volume.
The modeled antenna beam patterns are shown in Fig. 25.
As discussed in Sect. 5.1.1, REASON is sensitive to IESD events, therefore materials
selection was an important consideration, especially for out-of-vault hardware such as the
antennas. Conductive materials were used everywhere possible, but in places that required
electrical isolation, polyetheretherketone (PEEK) was used in mechanical joints to isolate
parts of the antenna. In order to minimize discharge from PEEK, it was heavily shielded and
plated with gold to provide a reliable bleed path. Wire harnessing was shielded in metallic


--- PAGE 49 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page49of91    51 
Fig.19 REASON HF stowed (top) and deployed (bottom)
conduit and wrapped with conductive material to minimize discharge amplitudes. Other
nonmetallic elements in the actuators and connectors were tested or analyzed as discussed
in Sect. 5.1.1. In addition to materials selection, the VHF antenna elements were moved
further from the Solar Array, which is a known source of IESD events.
In addition to the EM and FM antenna assembly units, one ﬂight-identical Qualiﬁcation
Model (QM) was built per operating frequency. The QM was subjected to more rigorous
testing than the FMs to fully qualify the design for ﬂight environments while reducing risk
to the ﬂight hardware. The QM antennas were characterized on the outdoor antenna range
at JPL because no indoor ranges are available at this frequency. The FM units were not
exposed to this test environment in order to preserve ﬂight cleanliness levels. Instead, a
proxy stowed antenna measurement was developed to check antenna aliveness, which is
equivalent to making a return loss measurement.
HF Antennas The HF antenna assembly consists of two 8.8-m monopoles that deploy
to create a 17.6-m antenna. Deployment is actuated by an Ensign-Bickford Aerospace &
Defense (EBAD) Frangibolt on each monopole, and deployment speed is controlled by a
ﬂyweight brake attached to a lanyard that runs inside each STACER. It will take less than
three minutes to fully deploy. Each monopole has a Deployment Assist Device (DAD) that
provides a stiff load path at the base of the STACERs and helps ensure proper formation of
the STACER coils. Figure19 shows the HF antenna assembly stowed and deployed.
VHFAntennas The VHF antenna assembly is a deployable folded dipole with a tip-to-
tip length of 2.76 meters. Each antenna assembly is comprised of a total of four STACERs
with two STACERS tied together to form a loop on each side of the antenna. All STACERs
have a synchronized deployment due to lanyards that run inside each STACER and around
a central axis. Deployment speed is controlled with a ﬂywheel. Deployment is actuated by


--- PAGE 50 ---
   51 Page50of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
Fig.20 REASON VHF antenna assembly stowed (top) and deployed (bottom)
a pinpuller, and it will take less than one second to fully deploy. Figure 20 shows the VHF
antenna assembly stowed and deployed.
HF and VHF Matching Networks (MNs)The antenna MNs are the interface between the
RF electronics and the antenna radiating elements. They are responsible for matching the
impedance of the electronics to the radiating elements via inductor-capacitor (LC) circuits
and a balun. There is one MN per antenna assembly (two for HF and four for VHF). From
a material and processes standpoint, the MNs are similar. The challenge of these units is the
environment. Given the temperature range (− 240 °C to 125 °C) and radiation environment,
which includes TID up to 5 Mrads as well as IESD effects, only passive components are
used, and the qualiﬁcation campaign was extensive. Substrates, epoxy, and other materials
and processes were carefully selected. Capacitors, inductors, and the baluns were tested to
the extreme environments to ensure that performance will hold in the Jovian environment.
5.2.4 CoaxialAssemblies
Coaxial assemblies connect the electronics inside the avionics module (the vault) to the MNs
and antennas. Two types of cable assemblies are used. Flexible assemblies are used inside
the vault and inside the solar array drive assembly (SADA); this allows for the actuation
of the solar array without interruption of the REASON signal path. Semi-rigid SiO
2 assem-
blies are used where the cables would be directly exposed to the Jovian environment, as they


--- PAGE 51 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page51of91    51 
Fig.21 REASON out-of-vault hardware
are more robust to both the temperature and radiation extremes. The entire run of coaxial
assemblies between the vault and the antennas were divided into short segments, with each
segment consisting of a length of coaxial cable and two connectors. Rotary connectors were
also incorporated into the REASON signal path, installed at the solar array hinges, in order
to allow for the deployment of the solar arrays without bending or stressing the semi-rigid
coaxial cables. A schematic showing the out-of-vault hardware, including antennas, cables,
and connectors, is shown in Fig. 21. All cable and connector types were appropriately qual-
iﬁed to their thermal and radiation environments.
5.3 RadarElectronicsIntegrationandTesting
The REASON team integrated and tested the in-vault radar electronics (DSES, HFS, VHFS
stacks and inter-stack cable harness), ﬁrst using the Engineering Model (EM) hardware for
test procedure development, and then using the Flight Model (FM) hardware for “run for
record” testing. The EM is a close replica of the FM hardware in form, ﬁt, and function, and
is slated for use in the Europa Clipper System Testbed (STB) during the mission. The FM
was delivered to the Europa Clipper Assembly, Test, and Launch Operations (ATLO) team
for spacecraft-level integration. REASON separately tested the EM/QM and FM antenna
assemblies, including antenna range testing for the EM/QM. The FM antennas are then
delivered to ATLO, where they are integrated and tested onto the spacecraft, along with the
vault electronics and coaxial feedline segments.
Before the FM integration phase, the team completed EM vault electronics Integration-
and-Test (I&T) with Electronic Ground Support Equipment (EGSE) developed with our
partners at NASA GSFC. Figure 22 shows a functional block diagram of the EGSE sys-
tem, including: a spacecraft simulator that emulates spacecraft electrical interfaces for bus
power, SpaceWire command/telemetry, and discrete control of the DSES MRAM conﬁg-
uration bank; an RF test rack that interfaces to the 2 HFS and 4 VHFS antenna ports for
acquiring transmit pulse waveform data and injecting simulated echoes into the radar re-


--- PAGE 52 ---
   51 Page52of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
Fig.22 Block diagram of the EGSE used in the in-vault radar hardware I&T campaigns
ceiver; and a Fiber Optic Delay Line (FODL) to test the radar point target response using a
ﬁxed round-trip delay for the echo pulses.
The RF Test Rack contains a programmable switch matrix for routing the antenna port
Tx/Rx signals to several types of commercial, off-the-shelf (COTS) test-and-measurement
equipment for monitoring transmit pulses and injecting on receive. A control console with
EGSE software communicates with the switch matrix and COTS equipment to accommo-
date automated testing of all six antenna ports via a software script. The EGSE system in-
cludes radar target simulator capabilities. The target simulator is composed of several com-
ponents – RF signal generators, a waveform function generator, the FODL, and Arbitrary
Waveform Generators (AWGs) – which together generate several classes of echo signals
(continuous waveform, pulsed waveforms, linear frequency modulated chirp point targets,
noise, distributed targets) at both HF- and VHF-bands for comprehensively testing the radar.
The radar electronics are designed with direct-access test port provisions to allow us to
synchronize the EGSE to the radar in time and to lock them in phase. The EGSE is exter-
nally triggered via direct access control-and-timing signal markers coming from the radar.
For example, these markers can indicate the start of an OP or the start of a particular dwell
within the OP, among several other possibilities. An RF test port from the DSE/Synthesizer
provides a copy of the 48-MHz STALO to an EGSE phase-lock multiplier, from which a
synchronous 10-MHz reference clock is derived and distributed to the EGSE COTS equip-
ment. These provisions allow phase-coherent testing of the radar and synchronization of the
EGSE to each dwell interval within the OP.
The team ran several radar functional and performance tests on the integrated vault elec-
tronics/EGSE system to verify instrument-level requirements. EM tests were performed in
an ambient environment with the Ground Support Equipment (GSE) staged in the same elec-
trical conﬁguration (including thermal vacuum-compatible test cables) planned later for FM
environmental testing. These EM trial runs were valuable in order to identify and resolve any
remaining issues in the test setup and helped to facilitate a successful FM test execution.
FM vault electronics testing included ambient and environmental test phases. During
the environmental phase, the team successfully completed a month-long Thermal Vacuum
(TV AC) test campaign over the ﬂight acceptance temperature range (− 25 °C to +55 °C over
three cycles, plus+70 C bakeout). TV AC was followed by an 11-day Electromagnetic Inter-
ference and Compatibility (EMI/EMC) test in an anechoic chamber; all of these tests passed


--- PAGE 53 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page53of91    51 
the Europa Clipper environmental requirements for radiated and conducted emissions/sus-
ceptibility.
As the DSES FPGA ﬁrmware features were being developed, Instrument Integration-
and-Test (II&T) had opportunities to test the ﬁrmware conﬁguration ﬁle upload capability
via SpaceWire command to MRAM. These tests veriﬁed a key requirement that the ﬁrmware
be re-programmable during the mission. II&T likewise gained experience running a suite
of functional and performance regression tests when new versions of the ﬁrmware were
released by the ﬁrmware team.
6 InstrumentOperations
6.1 DescriptionofInstrumentScienceOperationsCenter
The REASON Instrument Science Operations Center (ISOC) interfaces with the Europa
Clipper Mission Operations System (MOS). The ISOC consists of three elements: the Ex-
periment Planning System (EPS), the Instrument Operations System (IOS), and the instru-
ment Science Data System (ISDS). The EPS is located primarily at the Johns Hopkins Uni-
versity Applied Physics Laboratory (APL), the IOS is located primarily at JPL, and the iSDS
is located primarily at the University of Texas Institute for Geophysics (UTIG). During the
Europa tour, the ISOC elements, each assisted by a REASON liaison to the Europa Clipper
Project’s Tactical Science Group (TSG), will engage in regular meetings for consensus on
ﬂyby planning, science production, and instrument operations objectives and issues. During
Europa Campaigns 1 and 2 (EC1, EC2), when ﬂybys of Europa occur every 2–3 weeks,
ISOC interactions may be frequent and intense.
6.2 ExperimentPlanningSystem(EPS)
The EPS is primarily tasked with planning REASON Europa ﬂyby operations during the
Europa Campaigns to meet science requirements and iST objectives. The EPS will establish
observational priorities in consultation with the rest of the ISOC. The EPS will track sci-
ence requirement compliance and progress towards meeting these objectives and REASON
Planning Guidelines deﬁned for the Europa Clipper mission (Table 1).
The EPS is the primary element of the ISOC to interact with the Europa Clipper Science
Planning Operations Coordination (SPOC) team during the long-range mission planning
and science and instrument planning phases of the uplink planning process, all under the
Europa Clipper Science and Instrument Operations Subsystem (SIOS). The EPS will need
to review and provide input for potential updates of the Reference Activity Plan (RAP) for
Europa Clipper mission planning every week.
The EPS will deﬁne, develop, implement, and operate a variety of planning and visu-
alization tools. These will be based on the Cadmus tool currently in use by the EPS for
Europa tour and trajectory evaluation. The EPS will feed ﬂyby deﬁnition information to the
IOS, which will develop the corresponding radar command ﬁles.
6.3 InstrumentOperationsSystem(IOS)
The IOS is primarily tasked with instrument operations. On the uplink planning side, the IOS
builds and tests instrument command and control ﬁles (i.e., OPs), based on input received
from the EPS. The IOS interfaces with the SPOC to deliver uplink products and review


--- PAGE 54 ---
   51 Page54of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
command sequences as part of the science and instrument planning and sequence planning
and generation processes.
On the downlink side, the IOS evaluates instrument health, status, successful data collec-
tion, and hardware performance. It feeds this information as needed back to the EPS, iSDS,
and iST, as well as the Europa Clipper MOS. The IOS generates a raw data product ﬁle from
the REASON downlink data and produces a Partially Processed Data Product (PPDP) ﬁle
containing REASON and Spacecraft data and ancillary Ephemeris and related information.
Both ﬁles are passed to the iSDS for further processing and eventual delivery to the Plane-
tary Data System (PDS). The earliest downlinked data, known as “Feed-Forward data”, are
used to initially evaluate instrument health and to assist in ﬁne-tuning ﬂyby operations over
the next few Europa orbits.
The IOS will develop, test, and maintain several software tools and interface mechanisms
for producing and delivering the REASON command products and for monitoring and eval-
uating REASON health and performance over the life of the mission. The IOS will partici-
pate as a contributing member in science planning and prioritization, as well as science data
evaluation and analysis.
6.4 InstrumentScienceDataSystem(iSDS)
The iSDS is primarily tasked with generating the REASON science data products, following
the guidance of the Europa Clipper Science Data Management Plan (Sect. 8).
This iSDS will monitor and evaluate science data product quality, and will develop, main-
tain, and update as needed the algorithms and science data processing software needed to
generate the data products. The iSDS interfaces with Europa Clipper primarily through the
mission SDS (m-SDS) and participates both in the MOS as well as the Europa Clipper Sci-
ence System. The iSDS will distribute archival data to the PDS via the Geoscience Node at
Washington University in St. Louis.
6.5 InstrumentScienceTeam(iST)
Each element of the ISOC has a designated liaison to the broader REASON iST, which
includes deep expertise in both radar science and planetary science of icy worlds. These
liaisons manage the iST contributions by deﬁning, reﬁning, and monitoring progress to-
ward meeting REASON science measurement requirements (Sect. 4)a sw e l la sd e ﬁ n i n g
data products and algorithm development priorities for the iSDS. During the Europa tour,
the iST will evaluate and validate science data products and provide input to the Europa
Clipper Project Science Team. The iST, assisted by their liaisons to the ISOC elements, is
responsible for generating and testing science hypotheses to feed into the long-range mission
planning which will be used to prioritize observations by the EPS.
6.6 InstrumentConceptofOperations
Figure 23 illustrates the concept of operations for REASON. The control of the REASON
radar is primarily through an Observation Plan (OP) ﬁle. A set of OP ﬁles is uploaded to the
spacecraft early in the orbit. After the ﬁnal trajectory maneuver, the OP most consistent with
the updated trajectory is uploaded to REASON. It is activated typically 10 minutes prior
to closest approach, about 20 minutes after REASON power on, and controls REASON
behavior for the next 18–20 minutes through closest approach.


--- PAGE 55 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page55of91    51 
Fig.23 The sequence of events and timing for a typical REASON ﬂyby
Table 10 Radar Parameters Adjustable Over a Flyby
Radar Parameter Description
Pulse Repetition
Frequency (PRF)
Used to collect the desired along-track density of measurements and to optimize
usage of the round-trip echo travel times (more than one pulse may be in the air
at one time). In the OP, this is also referred to as the Cycle Repetition Frequency
(CRF), as the dual-frequency PRF may be more complex than in a single
frequency radar.
Chirp (transmit pulse) Used to optimize SNR given round-trip echo time and the PRF
Receive window
duration and position
Used to collect surface and subsurface echoes
Receiver gain Used to correct for echo power variations with altitude and environment
Number of on-board
pre-summed pulses
Used to limit data volume
Number of bits in
digitized echo
Used to limit data volume while maintaining dynamic range
During a typical ﬂyby, both HF and VHF radar data will be collected, HF for full depth
sounding (surface to∼ 30 km sub-surface), and VHF +X and –X channels for shallow sound-
ing (surface to ∼ 3 km depth), which are all multi-bit, high dynamic range data sets, and
full-depth VHF (FDVHF, up to 30 km depth), which is a single-bit, low dynamic range data
set. FDVHF is used for full depth sounding when the Jovian noise environment prohibits
full-depth HF operations, plus it provides higher spatial resolution than the HF data.
As the spacecraft altitude changes, many radar parameters must be adjusted due to the
constantly changing distance from the target and round-trip travel time for the radar pulses
(Table 10). The OP captures all these variations over the length of a ﬂyby.
REASON does not provide any internal data storage. All data, both housekeeping teleme-
try and science data, are immediately sent to the mass memory (Bulk Data Storage, BDS)
of the spacecraft for storage and eventual downlinking to Earth. Data during a ﬂyby are ac-


--- PAGE 56 ---
   51 Page56of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
Table 11 Packet Types Generated by REASON sent to BDS
Packet Type Packet description
Health & Status (H&S) Telemetry Telemetry to monitor health/status/safety, sent to both BDS and
Clipper Avionics for fault monitoring
Engineering Telemetry Currents and voltage telemetry sampled at 8 Hz
Processing parameters Dwell parameter sets and time sync information
HF loopback* HF reference waveform
HF receive* HF echo window
VHF loopback (+X) starboard* VHF reference waveform
VHF loopback (-X) port* VHF reference waveform
VHF +X 10 MHz receive* VHF echo window, starboard side, 10–MHz sampling
VHF -X 10 MHz receive* VHF echo window, portside, 10–MHz sampling
VHF 1-bit full depth sounding receive FDVHF combined channel, 1-bit, 10–MHz sampling
Raw data (HF, VHF±X) Raw data, for diagnostic purposes
BFPQ exponents (H, VHF ±X) Exponents only from above packets for quick power assessments
* These data sets use BFPQ, a data compression method.
cumulated in about 16 minutes, and are to be downlinked to Earth within one, and hopefully
no more than two, orbits of Jupiter (approximately two weeks per orbit). If the entire ﬂyby
dataset cannot be downlinked in a timely fashion, a subset of data sufﬁcient to verify key
performance during the ﬂyby and sufﬁcient to plan subsequent ﬂybys will be downlinked
within the required time frame. The ordering of data for science prioritization can be selected
before the ﬂyby and integrated into the OP, while the actual downlink prioritization can be
modiﬁed after the fact. Instrument health and status telemetry and other “feed-forward” data
are nominally given highest priority. The data packet types collected are shown in Table11.
7 CharacterizationofREASONAntennas
Understanding the performance of REASON’s antennas given their thermal environment
and their interactions with the spacecraft is a major challenge. Prior to launch, there will
be no testing of the individual antenna elements at ﬂight-like, cryogenic temperatures; the
primary validation and veriﬁcation of the antennas will be done by modeling. Additionally,
because of the size of both the antenna hardware and the Europa Clipper solar arrays, the
fully integrated spacecraft/solar array/antenna structure cannot be tested end-to-end on the
ground and must be characterized in situ. Intrinsic characteristics of the fully assembled and
deployed antenna, in particular the directivity beam patterns and interactions with the space-
craft, the other instruments and the external electromagnetic environment will be measurable
after launch. For this reason, calibration and characterization activities for the antennas are
planned from the post-launch stage through the tour stage of the Europa mission (Fig. 24).
As many of these activities as possible are to be scheduled before the ﬁrst Europa ﬂyby. The
activities consider improved calibration geometries earlier in the mission, ﬂyby-like antenna
element temperatures later in cruise, spacecraft power/energy limitations after Jupiter Orbit
Insertion (JOI), and the need to try a variety of characterization options as the effectiveness
of any one technique is not assured.


--- PAGE 57 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page57of91    51 
Fig.24 Visualization of planned cruise activities for REASON (+/− 1 month), the asterisk denotes a backup
activity awaiting approval
7.1 CruiseCharacterization
Cruise-phase activities can be classiﬁed into three groups: instrument checks, passive beam
characterization, and active beam characterization. Models of the beam pattern are shown in
Fig. 25. Instrument checks involve powering on REASON electronics, loading and running
health check OPs on the internal electronics, collecting the results of the OP, transmitting
them back to Earth, and powering down. Passive beam characterization requires powering
on REASON electronics and using the antennas in receive mode while the spacecraft slews
in a predetermined manner to observe external radio sources to determine the shape of the
antenna beam patterns. Active beam characterization is similar to passive beam characteri-
zation, but the instrument also transmits, either to a remote receiver or toward a target (from
which return data is collected).
7.1.1 InstrumentChecks
The REASON instrument has a maintenance requirement for a power-on every six months
during cruise, beginning as early as possible. These power-on instances will allow instru-
ment health checks using both internal and external sources. The instrument will operate the
HF- and VHF-band electronics with the antenna staring at regions of the sky with known
galactic background emission levels that are also free from point sources at 9 and 60 MHz
(“cold sky”). These tests consist of digitizing the HF-and VHF-band channels in the receive-
only mode, stepping through the receive attenuator settings, and evaluating the change in
value that digitized signals exhibit during ground processing.
7.1.2 OwensValleyRadioObservatory(OVRO)VHFActiveCharacterization
The REASON VHF directivity pattern is expected to be very wide along-track but con-
tains regions of sensitivity (beam pattern side lobes) and regions of insensitivity (beam pat-
tern nulls) cross-track. Because the array beam pattern cannot be fully characterized prior
to launch, obtaining an accurate understanding of the beam pattern post-launch and post-
deployment is a priority for REASON. One way to characterize the VHF antenna pattern is
through direct transmission to a radio facility on Earth. The REASON system engineering


--- PAGE 58 ---
   51 Page58of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
Fig. 25 Modeled HF (left) and VHF (right) antenna beam patterns, referenced to their phase centers at the
center of the spacecraft bus
team has been working with California Institute of Technology (Caltech) to design a charac-
terization activity using the 352-element Owens Valley Radar Observatory Long Wavelength
Array (OVRO-LW A) in Bishop, California as a receiver for REASON transmissions post-
launch. OVRO is operated by Caltech. This activity can also be used to detect a deployment
failure.
7.1.3 JupiterHFPassiveCharacterization
The REASON HF directivity pattern is expected to be largely symmetric. Validating the
modeled directivity pattern for the HF antenna will require a passive raster or spiral scan of
a strong HF source. Jupiter is a natural source of strong decameter radiation up to 44 MHz.
Once the instrument is close enough to distinguish this signal from the galactic background
noise, a raster or spiral scan of the planet’s disk can be used to probe the HF beam pattern.
When the spacecraft is within 1–2 AU of Jupiter there will be an adequate SNR for REA-
SON to detect this signal, while the planet’s disk will still appear small within the antennas’
ﬁelds of view. A difﬁculty in using Jupiter as an HF source for beam pattern characteriza-


--- PAGE 59 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page59of91    51 
tion is the variability in Jupiter’s radio signal strength (Carrer et al. 2018, 2021). There is
some regularity to the pattern of Jovian radio emissions, but they are very unstable, often
varying in magnitude over the course of minutes. Unpredictable bursts occur across many
frequencies and may last several hours. Due to this Jovian noise variability, the HF beam
characterization activity is expected to obtain coarse HF beam pattern knowledge, mostly
as a sanity check. It is not expected to provide highly accurate beam pattern characteriza-
tion. However, coarse knowledge is enough to meet the following goals 1) to know that the
instrument is properly receiving the signal and 2) to locate antenna pattern nulls.
7.1.4 MilkyWayHFandVHFPassiveCharacterization
The Milky Way galactic plane is a constant source of incoherent radio emissions over a
wide range of frequencies. This radio noise is known as the “galactic background”. The
average magnitude of emissions from 1–50 MHz is well-known and was used to calibrate
the Cassini radar over its range of frequencies (Zarka et al. 2004). The galactic background
shows a bright band in the plane of the Milky Way, with emissions highest near the galactic
center. Several discrete sources of radio transmissions add to the Milky Way emission pat-
tern. Given a galactic background pattern with sufﬁcient accuracy, or knowledge of a few
dominant point sources, it may be possible to deconvolve the HF or VHF antenna patterns
from a collection of noise measurements over a set of spacecraft orientations. This activity
requires maps of galactic background emissions at or near 9 MHz and 60 MHz with suf-
ﬁcient resolution for comparison to REASON measurements. Many partial maps of Milky
Way radio emissions have been created at VHF frequencies (de Oliveira-Costa et al. 2008;
Dowell et al. 2017). These maps vary in resolution and coverage. However, the Milky Way
radio pattern is not well characterized in HF. A model describing galactic emissions from
approximately 10–100 MHz, along with Fortran code to implement it, is presented in de
Oliveira-Costa (2008). The REASON team has used this model to generate galactic back-
ground temperature maps at 9 MHz and 60 MHz.
7.1.5 TheSunVHFPassiveCharacterization
The Sun is a natural source of weak radio emissions, with the intensity of normal solar emis-
sions at 60 MHz falling below that of galactic radio emissions at Earth, and the intensity at
9 MHz even lower. Higher intensity, but unpredictable, solar bursts and storms may provide
strong emissions that could be used to characterize the REASON antennas. For these solar
radio outbursts to be useful, REASON measurements of bursts and storms would need to
be cross-checked with Earth-based radio telescopes or dedicated solar missions (e.g., Solar
Terrestrial Relations Observatory (STEREO), Wind, Parker Solar Probe). If this could be
successfully arranged, it could provide a valuable comparison for calibration of the VHF
beam pattern. This activity has the best chance of success if performed near the peak of
solar activity.
7.2 CalibrationandCharacterizationActivitiesAfterJupiterOrbitInsertion(JOI)
7.2.1 GanymedeFlyby
A ﬂyby of Ganymede will provide important information about the active performance of the
radar subsystems prior to the ﬁrst Europa ﬂyby. The data collected at this ﬂyby will be used
to validate the REASON command parameter design and to ﬁne-tune key radar parameters,


--- PAGE 60 ---
   51 Page60of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
as well as to characterize HF/VHF band transmitted RF power levels, nadir beam realized
gains, and beam patterns at Europan ﬂyby temperatures.
During a Ganymede ﬂyby, REASON turns on at a high altitude (10,000 km). This con-
trasts with a Europan ﬂyby during which REASON turns on at approximately 1000 km
in altitude (Fig. 23). Two approaches will be taken to REASON’s high-altitude operation:
slewing and non-slewing. The slewing approach requires slewing the spacecraft cross-track
in order to provide active beam characterization data for the antenna beams. This approach
will be taken if the beam patterns remain poorly characterized despite the beam characteri-
zation activities described above. The high altitude will mitigate the effects of surface inho-
mogeneity and altitude changes on beam pattern characterization. A separate, non-slewing,
high-altitude ﬂyby will be used to collect average backscatter values to increase the science
return of the mission, and possibly for comparison with data from the Radar for Icy Moon
Exploration (RIME) on ESA’s JUICE mission (Sect. 7.2.3). For one of these ﬂybys, below
1000 km the spacecraft will transition to a steady state with nadir pointed toward the satellite
surface for a low-altitude (below 400 km) pass. During this low-altitude pass, data collected
will be used to validate the REASON command parameter design and to ﬁne-tune key radar
parameters, as well as to characterize HF/VHF band transmitted RF power levels and nadir
beam realized gains.
7.2.2 InternalElectrostaticDischarge(IESD)Characterization
To allow REASON to learn about IESD levels and their impact on REASON’s data volume,
REASON will conduct one or more in-ﬂight IESD tests when the spacecraft is in a radiation
environment similar to that found at Europa. This test requires all instruments which violate
REASON’s EMI/EMC requirements to be off and therefore cannot take place during CA of
a Europa ﬂyby. Instead, these tests will take place when the spacecraft comes to or within
the orbit of Europa, with no Europa nearby. Candidate events include during a Ganymede
or Callisto ﬂyby, or on the retreating end of a Europan ﬂyby. During these tests, REASON
will collect HF and VHF receive-only data to quantify the level of electrostatic discharge
(also known as “snap, crackle, pop”) from the spacecraft including solar arrays generated
by buildup from Jupiter’s intense radiation environment.
7.2.3 ConcurrencewithRIME
Galilean moon ﬂybys will allow REASON to take advantage of data collected by the Eu-
ropean Space Agency’s JUICE spacecraft, which will be touring the Jovian system con-
currently with REASON. RIME’s CBE arrival date is 2032. The JUICE RIME instrument
operates at a frequency of 9 MHz radar and is very close in design to REASON’s HF system.
JUICE will conduct ﬂybys of Callisto, Europa, and Ganymede, and will orbit Ganymede.
This provides unprecedented calibration and science opportunities for the REASON team to
compare surface backscatter values for these planetary surfaces with observations acquired
by RIME.
8 DataProcessingandArchiving
REASON generates multiple data products which are distinguished by their PDS4 level of
processing (e.g., Raw, Partially Processed, Calibrated, and Derived) or to reﬂect whether the


--- PAGE 61 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page61of91    51 
Fig.26 REASON PDS data collections
processing is routine (e.g., Standard) or ad hoc (e.g., Special) (Hughes et al. 2014). Stan-
dard and Special products are shown in Fig.26.O n c eR E A S O Nd a t ah a v eb e e nd o w n l i n k e d
from Europa Clipper, versions of the Raw Data Products (RAWs) and Partially Processed
Data Products (PPDPs) are generated by the IOS where they are then securely transferred
to the iSDS and converted into a PDS4-compatible format (Hughes et al.2014). The PPDPs
also serve as the input from which the iSDS produces Calibrated, Derived, and Special Data
Products. In general, Calibrated Data Products are two-dimensional radargrams, whereas
Derived Data Products are georeferenced text proﬁles of properties extracted from radar-
grams and can be either one dimensional proﬁle data or, in the case of clutter discrimination-
related data products, two-dimensional data arrays. Raw, Partially Processed, and Calibrated
REASON Data Products will be delivered to PDS for archiving within six months of receiv-
ing required science and ancillary data products from the Europa Clipper project. Derived
and Special Data Products are expected to take longer to generate and may not be archived
until after the end of the primary mission. Note that as of publication Raw and PPDP formats
are undergoing review by the PDS. Users are referred to the ﬁnal published PDS Software
Interface Speciﬁcation documents for data formats.
8.1 RawDataProducts(RAWs)
REASON raw data products provide the complete content of the radar science and telemetry
data downloaded from the Europa Clipper spacecraft for a speciﬁed ﬂyby of Europa or for
other data collections. Raw data products are extracted from original downlink data packets
and minimally processed. Any compression, reformatting, packetization or translation ap-
plied for the purposes of transmission or storage will be reversed to ensure archived data


--- PAGE 62 ---
   51 Page62of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
is in a PDS-approved format. Information relevant to instrument commanding, command
responses, and ﬁrmware state and health that are not relevant to science performance and
science data processing are not included as part of the raw products.
8.2 PartiallyProcessedDataProducts(PPDPs)
REASON PPDPs contain all the science data, ancillary data, and telemetry needed to pro-
duce the REASON science product for a speciﬁed ﬂyby of Europa. Internally, PPDPs are
distributed as Hierarchical Data Format v 5 ﬁles (HDF5). For archiving at the PDS, PPDPs
are organized in folders by encounter and then ﬁles for each channel with science and engi-
neering data ﬁles as well as ancillary data ﬁles for relevant spacecraft telemetry, instrument
telemetry, and intermediate data (e.g., trajectory information and geometry information).
Science data are stored in binary three-dimensional arrays and complementary channel-
speciﬁc data are stored as text tab-delimited tables format. The Engineering Data File con-
tains the parameters that deﬁne the state of the radar, such as mode, cycle duration, and
BFPQ bit depths. It also includes data quality metrics such as noise levels and the cor-
relation between subsequent fast-time records. The Intermediate Level Data File contains
elements that specify timing, spacecraft state vector, and moon and planet ephemerides de-
rived from SPICE.
12 The Instrument Telemetry Data File contains the elements that specify
the status such as temperatures of REASON subsystems. The Spacecraft Telemetry Data
File contains the temperatures of several REASON components located outside the vault,
mostly the antennas and signal paths leading to the antennas.
8.3 CalibratedDataProducts
For REASON, Calibrated Data Products are two-dimensional radargrams. There are three
types of REASON Calibrated Data Products: (i) unfocusedaltimetry radargrams, (ii) single-
look complex-valued SAR focused sounding radargrams, and (iii) multi-look SAR focused
sounding radargrams. Unfocusedaltimetry and multi-look SAR focusedsounding data prod-
ucts are each comprised of two distinct deliverables: (i) A binary array of 32-bit integers
corresponding to the radargram magnitudes (dB× scale factor), where fast-time records are
padded such that they are all the same length and the surface echoes are properly aligned, and
(ii) an ascii table of metadata containing timing and geolocation data associated with each
fast-time record in the corresponding byte array. In addition to these two deliverables, the
single-look complex-valued SAR focused data product contain a third deliverable: a binary
array of 32-bit integers corresponding to the radargram phase (radians× scale factor) where
fast-time records are padded such that they are all the same length, and the surface echoes are
properly aligned. There are three processing modules used to generate these Calibrated Data
Products: (i) range compression and ionospheric correction module, (ii) sounding module,
and (iii) altimetry module.
8.3.1 RangeCompressionandIonosphericCorrectionModule
Range compression and ionospheric corrections represent two fundamental processing steps
critical for interpretation of REASON data. Echoes recorded in unprocessed fast time
12SPICE is an information system Navigation and Ancillary Information Facility (NAIF) to support plan-
etary exploration missions by providing data sets known as “kernels” that contain information including
ephemerides of spacecraft and planetary bodies as a function of time (Acton et al. 2018).


--- PAGE 63 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page63of91    51 
records are reﬂected versions of the chirp from the surface and subsurface. Energy from
these echoes is often overlapping making them challenging to differentiate and interpret.
Range compression is used to compress the energy in the reﬂected chirps; thereby improv-
ing the SNR of surface and subsurface reﬂections as well as enhancing fast time resolution.
Any electromagnetic wave propagating through a charged plasma may experience attenuat-
ing and/or dispersive (i.e., radar waves of different frequencies travel at different velocities)
effects due to its interaction with the various constituent particles. Ionospheric correction is
used to estimate and correct for phase delays caused by ionospheric effects across the HF
and VHF signal bandwidths (Grima et al. 2015; Scanlan et al. 2019). The REASON range
compression and ionospheric correction processor operates on a dwell-by-dwell basis pro-
ducing a set of range compressed and ionosphere corrected fast time records as well as an
estimate of the average TEC of the ionosphere between Europa Clipper and Europa during
the dwell.
8.3.2 SoundingModule
SAR focusing is a key step in the processing of space-borne radar sounding data. Mass and
power constraints limit the design of REASON HF and VHF antennas to folded dipoles,
which produce wide beam patterns in both the along-track (azimuthal) and cross-track di-
rections. Wider beam patterns have larger footprints (i.e., the portion of Europa’s surface
illuminated by a single REASON chirp), which limits the ability to resolve closely spaced
surface and subsurface targets of interest.
SAR processing attempts to reduce the along-track extent of REASON footprints by
creating a synthetic antenna with an aperture equal to the Fresnel zone radius. The pre-
dictable response of a nadir point target in the middle of the synthetic aperture is then
used to coherently re-combine (focus) the echoes recorded by REASON across the syn-
thetic aperture to their corresponding position on the mid-aperture fast time record. This
focusing decreases the size of the radar footprint in the along-track direction but note that
the cross-track extent of the footprint remains unchanged. Repeating the process along the
groundtrack yields a focused radargram with enhanced along-track resolution and improved
SNR.
While multiple SAR focusing algorithms exist for use with a variety of different data sets
(e.g., Cumming and Wong 2005; Peters et al. 2007a; Kobayashi et al. 2011), the REASON
sounding processor is based on the delay Doppler algorithm used in the processing of Mar-
tian SHARAD sounding data sets (Campbell et al. 2013a). The delay Doppler technique
was chosen as the base algorithm for REASON due to its simplicity (and therefore more
readily modiﬁable considering REASON idiosyncrasies) and multiple decades of heritage
with SHARAD.
REASON is distinct compared to previous space-borne radar sounders (SHARAD,
MARSIS, LRS) due to the combination of its Doppler sampling requirements and the design
of the Europa Clipper mission. A detailed description of how REASON’s Doppler sampling
requirements and the Europa Clipper mission design give rise to these unique idiosyncrasies
is provided in Scanlan et al. (2021).
8.3.3 AltimetryModule
The altimetry processor has the objective to create height proﬁles along the groundtrack
of the spacecraft between 1000 km altitude and closest approach. The proﬁles might be


--- PAGE 64 ---
   51 Page64of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
biased by residual ionospheric effects and are only designed for relative accuracy (not as
an absolute geodetic reference). The input data for the processor are pulse compressed and
ionospherically corrected radargrams.
In order to retrieve the altimetric return, classical altimetry processing techniques rely on
leading edge detection, tracking the radar echo centroid, or maximum likelihood estimations
as applied for instance to the Cassini radar. The REASON altimetry processor uses a ß-
5 retracking algorithm which will produce a range estimate of the leading-edge position
of the waveform (LEP). The ß-5 tracker has been developed to measure ranges from the
Seasat radar altimeter over continental ice sheets and is also known as the NASA GSFC V4
retracker. For a detailed description of the method and its application to SHARAD data see
Steinbrügge et al. (2021).
8.4 DerivedDataProducts
Derived Data Products are results that have been generated using one or more Calibrated
Data Products. There are six REASON Derived Data Products: (i) the TEC (plasma) proﬁle,
(ii) altimetry proﬁle, (iii) reﬂectometry proﬁle, (iv) interferogram and correlation map im-
ages, (v) reprojected radargram image, and (vi) cluttergram image. There are ﬁve processing
modules used to generate these derived data products: (i) altimetry module, (ii) reﬂectom-
etry module, (iii) interferometry clutter discrimination module, (iv) reprojected radargram
clutter discrimination module, and (v) cluttergram clutter discrimination module.
8.5 SpecialDataProducts
Special Data Products are data products which are not produced from routine processing.
There are two REASON Special Data Products: (i) EIS-derived reprojected radargram im-
age and (ii) ranging. There are two processing modules used to generate these special data
products: (i) EIS-derived reprojected radargram clutter discrimination module and (ii)rang-
ing module. The EIS-derived reprojected radargram image requires data from EIS and will
have to be processed manually. The ranging product requires human intervention to select
appropriate radar returns.
8.6 BrowseDataProduct
An individual Browse Data Product is produced for each Derived Data Product. These REA-
SON Browse Data Products are meant to allow end users of REASON data to easily assess
if the corresponding data set is potentially useful to their scientiﬁc goals and serve as a
human-interpretable representation of the data set. As such, Browse Data Products are not
meant to be the foundation on which scientiﬁc analyses based on REASON data are built.
Browse Data Products corresponding to proﬁle Derived Data Products (i.e., TEC,altimetry,
and reﬂectometry proﬁles) are presented as two-dimensional images. Each image presents
a colored nadir REASON groundtrack overlain on top of a Europa image mosaic. Colors
along the groundtrack represent the values in the speciﬁc Derived REASON Data Prod-
uct being presented. A separate image is provided for each panel crossed by the ground-
track.


--- PAGE 65 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page65of91    51 
9 BeyondREASONGuidingandExtendedScience
9.1 FutureWorktoSupportREASONGuidingScience
Future work, including laboratory, analog, and synergistic studies, will be necessary to sup-
port timely interpretation of REASON observations during the prime mission.
9.1.1 LaboratoryExperiments
The dielectric properties of pure ice have been measured over a range of cryogenic temper-
atures (Matsuoka et al. 1996 and references therein). However, differences in experimental
procedures and sample properties represent a signiﬁcant source of uncertainty (see review
in Pettinelli et al. 2015). The presence of non-ice impurities and/or void space further alters
these properties. Mixing models are often employed to represent the effective permittivity
of materials composed of multiple components (Sihvola 2013). Classical mixing models
assume that the scale of inclusions in a matrix is small relative to the wavelength and in-
clusions are homogeneously distributed isotropic spheres (Sihvola 2013). More complex
mixing models which incorporate geometry and anisotropy exist but are not typically used
by the planetary community. Recent laboratory experiments motivated by ocean worlds ex-
ploration have focused on constraining the dielectric properties of salt hydrates, speciﬁcally
meridianiite (MgSO
4·11H2O) (Pettinelli et al. 2016; Grimm and Stillman 2019).
The dielectric properties of Europa’s near-surface are likely dominantly governed by
three phases: ice, void space, and salt hydrates. However, at depths/temperatures where brine
is thermodynamically stable, brine will likely represent the dominant non-ice contribution
to the effective permittivity. Unlike salt hydrates, which have a negligible electrical conduc-
tivity (Pettinelli et al. 2016; Grimm and Stillman 2019), the electrical conductivity of these
brines could represent a signiﬁcant contribution to the effective permittivity of the bulk ice
(Stillman et al. 2018). Future laboratory experiments to support interpretation of REASON
observations should focus on constraining dielectric properties of these multiphase, multi-
component materials, speciﬁcally (i) evaluating the applicability of different mixing models
for representing hypothesized mixtures, (ii) investigating the dependence on the volume
fraction and geometry of brine inclusions, and (iii) considering a broader range of non-ice
impurities including clathrates and sulfuric acid hydrates.
9.1.2 TerrestrialandPlanetaryAnalogStudies
Sub-IceHypersalineSystems Ice-penetrating radar data have been used to identify putative
subglacial hypersaline systems beneath ice caps on Earth (Rutishauser et al.2018, 2022)a n d
on Mars (Orosei et al. 2018). These systems are attributed to basal reﬂectors that are both
highly reﬂective (suggesting the presence of water) and coincident with estimated bed tem-
peratures that are too low for water to be thermodynamically stable. However, because ap-
parent reﬂectivity is governed by the dielectric contrast, interface roughness, and attenuation
to the interface — interpretation is challenged by uncertainties in both interface characteris-
tics and ice column properties. This ambiguity has been emphasized in recent publications
which have been proposing alternative hypotheses to subglacial hypersaline systems as the
source of the radar-bright regions beneath the southern polar cap of Mars (e.g., Bierson et al.
2021; Schroeder and Steinbrügge 2021; Smith et al. 2021; Grima et al. 2022a; Lalich et al.
2022). Some of these alternative hypotheses have in turn been claimed to be either unphys-
ical (Mattei et al. 2022) or incapable of producing the observed signal (Orosei et al. 2022;


--- PAGE 66 ---
   51 Page66of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
Stillman et al. 2022; Lauro et al. 2022; Cosciotti et al. 2023). On Earth, ice-penetrating
radar data sets can be complemented by other geophysical data sets (e.g., seismic, gravity,
magnetics) or additional ice-penetrating radar data collected using systems with different
bandwidths and/or center frequencies (Chu et al.2021;C h a ne ta l .2023b), to improve inter-
pretation. However, REASON will be the only investigation on Europa Clipper capable of
direct sensing of the ice shell interior. As such, the development of more robust approaches
for analyzing radar data acquired over putative hypersaline subglacial water systems on
Earth is essential for interpretation of future data collected by REASON.
AccretedIce Ice shelves and glaciers represent important analogs for ice-penetrating radar
studies of Europa. Although the environmental conditions at Europa and Earth’s cryosphere
are generally not directly comparable, there are shared characteristics that will produce sim-
ilar responses when studied with an ice-penetrating radar. Beneath the ice shelves, seawater
can freeze onto the base forming “accreted ice”. The physical processes that govern this
freeze-on may occur at Europa’s ice–ocean interface, incorporating salt into the ice shell
(Buffo et al. 2020; Wolfenbarger et al. 2022a). These salts alter the dielectric properties
of pure ice (Pettinelli et al. 2016), suggesting accretion could serve as a mechanism to in-
troduce dielectric contrasts into the ice shell. On Earth, marine ice layers at the base of
meteoric ice shelves can manifest as internal reﬂectors that precede and often mask the ice–
ocean interface (Sect. 1.3,F i g .5). These marine–meteoric interfaces could be considered a
radar-analog for eutectic interfaces within Europa’s ice shell. As such, understanding how
properties of these interfaces on Earth inﬂuence the character of the radar reﬂection will
improve interpretation of analogous reﬂectors at Europa.
9.2 REASONComplementaryScience
Europa Science beyond the formal Science Requirements and Planning Guidelines pre-
sented above (Table 1) is often a focus of discussion for the Europa Clipper Science Team.
Three examples are presented below as a powerful indicator of the potential impact of the
REASON science investigations beyond the established deﬁnition of Guiding and Extended
Science with the caveat that this science is opportunistic and not required by the mission.
9.2.1 LandingSiteReconnaissance
It is the standard scheme of planetary exploration that an in-situ investigation of the surface
by a planetary lander would follow a ﬂagship science spacecraft such as Europa Clipper
(e.g., Pappalardo et al. 2013). Although the timeline of such a development is unknown,
Europa Clipper is expected to be the mission that will provide the reconnaissance data set
to support the selection of a future landing site (Phillips et al. 2024). Consequently, obser-
vations from Europa Clipper must be capable of providing physical characterization of the
surface to ensure a safe deployment of a probe, as well as assessment of the target science
value for a follow-on lander.
REASON will mainly contribute to reconnaissance goals through itssounding, altimetry
and reﬂectometry measurements. Sounding measurements will support the regional science
assessment of the landing area by providing insights into the subsurface structure, includ-
ing possible thermal boundaries and compositional contacts (e.g., salt layers). In contrast to
sounding,R E A S O Naltimetry measurements are solely focused on determining the relative
distance from the Europa Clipper spacecraft to Europa’s surface using the higher vertical
resolution (15 m in free space) VHF surface echoes. Altimetry measurements will com-
plement visible stereoscopy by providing contextual surface topography along the Europa


--- PAGE 67 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page67of91    51 
Clipper groundtracks. The combination of REASON sounding and altimetry data will also
be used to search for the presence of liquid water either within or at the base of the ice
shell by way of isostasy. The detection of zones of liquid water within the ice shell will be
relevant to a future Europa lander as it signiﬁes an area of on-going geological activity and
may host a potentially habitable, near-surface environment. Reﬂectometry measurements of
the surface echo at the two REASON frequencies will provide insights to dominant surface
and near-surface properties (e.g., roughness) within the radar footprint, to depths of 15 m to
150 m, that are directly relevant to both landing science and risk assessment. That includes
porosity (Grima et al. 2014a), roughness (Grima et al. 2014b), fallout-deposit from recent
plume activity (Scanlan et al. 2022), near-surface refrozen brines (Rutishauser et al. 2016;
Chan et al. 2023b), or the presence of near-surface liquid water potentially accessible to
future in-situ sampling (Grima et al. 2016).
9.2.2 JUICE/RIMESynergy
JUICE will operate in the Jovian system concurrent with Europa Clipper. One of JUICE’s
primary mission objectives is to make detailed observations of Ganymede, but it will also
collect measurements at Europa and Callisto during its initial orbital insertion phases. The
JUICE payload includes RIME (Bruzzone et al. 2011), a 9-MHz sister instrument to REA-
SON HF. RIME and REASON overlapping targets and similar instrumental parameters, of-
fer a unique opportunity for synergistic science. Both instruments will have common obser-
vations at intersections, allowing radiometric calibration of their respective measurements.
The outcome is to produce a radiometrically homogeneous 9-MHzreﬂectometry and sound-
ing dataset covering Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto (a ﬁrst of its kind in planetary explo-
ration), which could be used to relatively compare signal attenuation and scattering from
the various englacial and surface structures encountered across the Jovian icy moons. RIME
can also set its transmitted bandwidth to either 1 MHz (same as REASON) or 3 MHz. Be-
cause surface roughness is wavelength-dependent, observations with REASON and RIME
at the same center frequency (9 MHz) but different bandwidths could help to isolate the ef-
fects of surface roughness in order to better characterize bulk near-surface properties (e.g.,
layering) over various types of terrains (Chan et al. 2023a). Assuming the effects of rough-
ness are either negligible, analogous to internal layers in glacial ice (e.g., MacGregor et al.
2015 and references therein), or can be quantiﬁed and corrected (e.g., Grima et al. 2019),
multi-frequency/bandwidth analyses could also be used to better characterize plume fall-
out deposits at the surface (Scanlan et al. 2022) or salt layers at depth (Wolfenbarger et al.
2023). Finally, the concurrent presence of JUICE and Europa Clipper in the Jovian system
can help to better characterize its magnetospheric plasma where both radars could be used
as transmitters-receivers of each other signal, the relative delay and attenuation of which are
indicative of the plasma density along the propagation path.
9.2.3 PassiveRadarSounding
REASON has the capability to perform passive sounding using signals of opportunity orig-
inating from the Jovian magnetosphere (Cecconi et al. 2012; Romero-Wolf et al. 2015;
Schroeder et al. 2016). In this mode of operation, REASON would not be transmitting a
signal, but would record incoming Jovian emissions and their possible reﬂections from the
surface and subsurface of Europa. A processing step analogous to range-compression would
then reveal geological features as in standard, active sounding (Gerekos et al. 2020). Jo-
vian decametric emissions are coherent and highly beamed, making them good candidates


--- PAGE 68 ---
   51 Page68of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
for passive sounding (Carrer et al. 2021; Gassot et al. 2022). These characteristics could
similarly be favorable for estimating TEC and studying the ionosphere (Peters et al. 2020).
The use of passive sounding could complement the standard concept of operations on the
sub-Jovian side of Europa in a high-noise environment. While the spatial extent of solar
radio-sources likely prevents their use for passive subsurface sounding (Peters et al. 2022),
passive observations of solar bursts from the outer solar system can be envisioned. Recent
re-analyses of archival SHARAD and MARSIS data have shown that radar sounders have
the capability to image type-III bursts as high resolution from Martian orbit (Gerekos et al.
2024), and such multi-point observations can inform about the processes behind burst gen-
eration (Jebaraj et al. 2020) and their propagation across interplanetary space (Reid and
Kontar 2021).
10 Summary
REASON is a combined HF/VHF ice penetrating radar speciﬁcally conceived, developed,
and operated to provide a top-to-bottom window into many of the most critical and poorly
understood processes and conditions governing the behavior, evolution, and habitability of
Europa’s ice shell. At the highest level, REASON is designed to probe the exosphere, the
surface/near-surface, the shallow subsurface to three kilometers and the full depth of Eu-
ropa’s ice shell to an ice–ocean interface at depths as great as thirty kilometers with nadir-
directed active radar signals centered at both 9 MHz and 60 MHz. This pair of frequencies
provides both robustness (with the 9 MHz band less sensitive to surface roughness and vol-
ume scattering and the 60 MHz band less sensitive to Jovian radio noise) and richness (cap-
turing cross-frequency signatures of ionosphere and ice-shell properties and processes) to
the full suite of Europa Clipper radar assessment and sounding investigations. Similarly, the
unique dual-channel, cross-track interferometric capability of REASON’s VHF band allows
for potentially obfuscating cross-track surface clutter with similar delays as subsurface sig-
nals to be discriminated internally to the instrument, increasing the ﬁdelity and reliability of
radargram interpretation. REASON will be calibrated through carefully coordinated combi-
nations of transmitting and receiving HF and VHF before and after Jupiter orbit insertion, d.
With these calibrations, REASON will be operated and its data analyzed to explore physical
constraints on the potential habitability of Europa through a full suite ofaltimetry, reﬂectom-
etry, sounding, interferometry, plasma characterization,a n dranging measurements—each
described brieﬂy below with their implications for REASON guiding and extended science
(Table 2) as well as complementary science.
Surface returns from the REASON VHF (with ionospheric-delay corrections provided
by concurrent HF surface returns) are a signiﬁcant but often underappreciated observation
at Europa, representing the primary altimetry measurement for the Europa Clipper pay-
load. This altimetry measurement will be used, in combination with EIS stereo imagery,
to provide registration and measurement of the surface geometry of Europa which in turn
provides a framework for critical hypothesis tests of ﬂoatation from any shallow subsur-
face water bodies. In addition to providing context for both interior ice shell processes and
their expression in surface geology through altimetry, REASON near-surface reﬂectometry
will provide a quantitative assessment of Europa’s surface roughness and near-surface ma-
terial properties (including brines, salt layers, porosity, and plume deposits). Reﬂectometry
measurements will also provide wavelength-scale statistical constraints on surface rough-
ness, which are also critical for landing-zone reconnaissance. As a sounding instrument,
REASON will be able to probe both shallow (to three kilometers) and deeper subsurface


--- PAGE 69 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page69of91    51 
processes of Europa’s ice shell (up to thirty kilometers) by exploiting the sensitivity of HF
and VHF (assisted by interferometry) radar signals to both the compositional and geomet-
ric character of the shallow subsurface (e.g. water and salt bodies) as well as the thermo-
physical structure (e.g. temperature, brine pockets) across the full depth of the ice shell
potentially including the ice-ocean interface or its thermophysical proxy. The detection and
characterization of reﬂectivity, attenuation, and scattering signatures in REASON sound-
ing data at intersections, along proﬁles, and across panels will place unique constraints
on subsurface properties and processes such as the depth of pore-closure, the existence
of eutectic horizons, shallow and relict water bodies, and the thickness and salinity of the
ice shell and ocean. The global distribution of REASON VHF returns from ranging be-
tween the spacecraft and the surface at ﬂyby crossovers compared with simulated surface
returns (from EIS digital elevation models including both returns at nadir and off-nadir
“clutter”) will provide the opportunity to place additional constraints on tidal deforma-
tion as part of larger, mission-wide, geodetic inversions to constrain ice-shell and ocean
thickness. The combination of REASON HF and VHF surface returns provide a critical
plasma characterization measurement that will not only allow for ionospheric correction
of altimetry and ranging measurements but also provide essential constraints on the nadir
TEC, which will enable both better characterization of the ionosphere and local plume
detection. Taken together, the REASON investigation and instrument are designed to en-
able a unique suite of radar observations and analyses to test hypotheses and reveal pro-
cesses, by assessing and sounding Europa from the ocean to the near-surface of the ice
shell.
Appendix: EnsembleofPointModels(EPM)Tables
Tables 12–14 present the regime modes assumed in the construction of the point models
described in Sect. 4.3. For point models in parentheses, salt layers represent the target inter-
face, as opposed to the subsurface water interface.
Table 12 Shallow Subsurface Structure EPM
Regime SS01(07) SS02(08) SS03(09) SS04(10) SS05(11) SS06(12)
Surface Roughness Ridged
Plains
Chaotic
Terrain
Chaotic
Terrain
Ridged
Plains
Ridged
Plains
Chaotic
Terrain
Near-Surface Density Non-Porous
Near-Surface Thickness Thin
Near-Surface Composition Clean Ice
Off-Nadir Surface Feature Ribbons & Curbs
Deep Regolith Absent Present Absent Absent Absent Absent
Surface Temperature Polar & Equatorial
Ice Shell Composition Marine Pure Pure Marine Pure Marine
Ice Shell Thickness Thin
Subsurface Water Interface Sharp Sharp Sharp Mush Sharp Sharp
Basal Temperature Melting Melting Melting Eutectic Melting Melting
(Salt Layer Thickness) 1 m
(Salt Layer Depth) 1/2 Ice Shell Thickness


--- PAGE 70 ---
   51 Page70of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
Table 13 Full Depth Subsurface Exchange EPM
Regime FD01(07) FD02(08) FD03(09) FD04(10) FD05(11) FD06(12)
Surface Roughness Ridged
Plains
Chaotic
Terrain
Chaotic
Terrain
Ridged
Plains
Ridged
Plains
Chaotic
Terrain
Near-Surface Density Non-Porous
Near-Surface Thickness Thin
Near-Surface Composition Clean Ice
Off-Nadir Surface Feature Ribbons & Curbs
Deep Regolith Absent Present Absent Absent Absent Absent
Surface Temperature Polar & Equatorial
Ice Shell Composition Marine Pure Pure Pure Pure Marine
Ice Shell Thickness Thin Thin Thin Thick Thick Thick
Subsurface Water Interface Mush Mush Mush Sharp Mush Sharp
Basal Temperature Eutectic Eutectic Eutectic Melting Eutectic Melting
( S a l tL a y e rT h i c k n e s s ) 1m 1m 1m 1m 1m 0 . 2m
(Salt Layer Depth) 1/2 Ice Shell Thickness 10 km
Table 14 Altimetry Reﬂectometry EPM
Regime AR01 AR02 AR03 AR04 AR05 AR06
Surface
Roughness
Ridged
Plains
Chaotic
Terrain
Ridged
Plains
Ridged
Plains
Chaotic
Terrain
Ridged
Plains
Near-Surface
Density
Non-Porous Non-Porous Porous Non-Porous Non-Porous Porous
Near-Surface
Thickness
Thick Thick Thick Thick Thick Thin
Near-Surface
Comp.
Clean Ice Clean Ice Clean Ice Brine-Filled
Ice
Brine-Filled
Ice
Clean Ice
Off-Nadir
Surface
Feature
––– –––
Deep
Regolith
––– –––
Surface
Temperature
––– –––
Ice Shell
Composition
––– –––
Ice Shell
Thickness
––– –––
Subsurface
Water
Interface
––– –––
Basal
Temperature
––– –––
(Salt Layer
Thickness)
––– –––
(Salt Layer
Depth)
––– –––


--- PAGE 71 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page71of91    51 
AcronymsandAbbreviations
A/D Analog/Digital
Actr Actuator
ADC Analog-to-Digital Converter
ALSE Apollo 17 Lunar Sounder Experiment
ANT Antenna
APL Applied Physics Laboratory
AS Antenna Subsystem
AS-Mech Antenna Subsystem – Mechanical
ATLO Assembly, Test, Launch and Operations
ATTN Attenuation
AWG Arbitrary Waveform Generator
BDS Bulk Data Storage
BFPQ Block Floating-Point Quantization
B/H Ratio of magnetic ﬂux density (B) to magnetic ﬁeld strength (H)
CA Closest Approach
Caltech California Institute of Technology
CBE Current Best Estimate
CDH Command and Data Handling
CLK Clock
Coax Coaxial cable
COTS Commercial Off-the-Shelf
CRF Cycle Repetition Frequency
CSV Comma-Separated Value
CTRL/TLM Control/Telemetry
CTRL/TMG Control/Timing
CTU Control and Timing Unit
D/A Digital/Analog
DAC Digital-to-Analog Converter
DAD Deployment Assist Device
DC Direct Current
DEM Digital Elevation Model
DES Digital Electronic Subsystem
DMM Digital Multimeter
DTM Digital Terrain Model
DPU Digital and Power Unit
DQA Data Quality Analyzer
DSE Digital and Synthesizer Electronics
DSEPCU DSE Power Converter Unit
DSES Digital and Synthesizer Electronics Stacks
DSN Deep Space Network
E-THEMIS Europa Thermal Emission Imaging System
ECM Europa Clipper Magnetometer
EGSE Electronic Ground Support Equipment
EIS Europa Imaging System
EM Engineering Module
EMC Electromagnetic Compatibility
EMI Electromagnetic Interference
EMI/EMC Electromagnetic Interference and Compatibility


--- PAGE 72 ---
   51 Page72of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
EPM Ensemble of Point Models
EPS Experiment Planning System
ESA European Space Agency
Europa-UVS Europa Ultraviolet Spectrograph
FDVHF Full Depth Very High Frequency
FET Field-Effect Transistor
FJ Field Joint
Flt Sys Flight System
FM Flight Module
FODL Fiber Optic Delay Line
FPGA Field-Programmable Gate Array
Frang Frangibolt
FrngActuator Frangibolt Actuator
Func Gen Function Generator
GaN Gallium Nitride
GPS Global Positioning System
GSE Ground Support Equipment
GSFC Goddard Space Flight Center
H&S Health and Status
HAAMX High Frequency Antenna Assembly -X
HAAPX High Frequency Antenna Assembly +X
HD Hard Drive
HF High Frequency
HFPAU High Frequency Power Ampliﬁer Unit
HFPSU High Frequency Power Supply Unit
HFRx High Frequency Receivers Assembly
HFS High Frequency Electronic Stack
HFTxDA High Frequency Transmit Distribution Assembly
HW Hardware
I/F Interface
I&O Inner and Outer
I&T Integration-and-Test
IC Integrated Circuit
IEP Initial Encounter Plan
IESD Internal Electrostatic Discharge
II&T Instrument Integration-and-Test
Instr Instrument
IOS Instrument Operations System
iSDS Instrument Science Data System
ISOC Instrument Science Operations Center
iST Instrument Science Team
Itfc Interface
JOI Jupiter Orbit Insertion
JPL Jet Propulsion Laboratory
JUICE JUpiter ICy moons Explorer
KRP Key Radar Parameter
LEP Leading Edge Position
LRS Lunar Radar Sounder
LVDS Low-V oltage Differential Signaling


--- PAGE 73 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page73of91    51 
m-SDS Mission Science Data System
magamp Magnetic Ampliﬁer
MARSIS Mars Advanced Radar for Subsurface and Ionospheric Sounding
MASPEX MAss Spectrometer for Planetary EXploration
Meas. Measurement
MISE Mapping Imaging Spectrometer for Europa
MN Matching Network
MOS Mission Operations System
MRAM Magnetoresistive Random-Access Memory
MRAM_SEL Magnetoresistive Random-Access Memory Select
MRO Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter
MX -X
MXI -X Inner
MXO -X Outer
NAIF Navigation and Ancillary Information Facility
NASA National Aeronautics and Space Administration
NSLE Normalized Side Lobe Envelope
O-scope Oscilloscope
OBP On-Board Processor
OP Observation Plan
OTM Orbit Trim Maneuver
OVRO Owens Valley Radar Observatory
OVRO-LW A Owens Valley Radar Observatory Long Wavelength Array
PAU Power Ampliﬁcation Unit
PA Power Ampliﬁer
PC Personal Computer
PCE Planning, Coordination, and Execution Operations
PCDA Power Control Distribution Assembly
PCU Power Converter Unit
PDS Planetary Data System
PEEK Polyetheretherketone
PI Principal Investigator
PIMS Plasma Instrument for Magnetic Sounding
PLL Phase Locked Loop
PME Propulsion Module Electronics
PPDP Partially Processed Data Product
PRF Pulse Repetition Frequency
Prop Propulsion
PRT Platinum Resistance Thermometer
PSS Power Switch Slice
PSU Power Supply Unit
PWM Pulse-Width Modulation
PWR Power
PX +X
PX/MX +X/-X
PXI +X Inner
PXO +X Outer
RAMBo Radar Acquisition & Management Board
RAP Reference Activity Plan


--- PAGE 74 ---
   51 Page74of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
RAW Raw Data Product
REASON Radar for Europa Assessment and Sounding: Ocean to Near-surface
REU Remote Engineering Unit
RF Radio Frequency
RFES Radio Frequency Electronics System
RFES-JPL Radio Frequency Electronics System Jet Propulsion Laboratory
RFI Radio Frequency Interference
RFPSU Radio Frequency Power Supply Unit
RIME Radar for Icy Moons Exploration
Rx Receiver
S/C Spacecraft
SA Solar Arrays
SAR Synthetic Aperture Radar
SC/PropMod Spacecraft Propulsion Module
Sci Sys Science System
SCOS Spacecraft Operations Subsystem
SDS Science Data System
SELENE SELenological and ENgineering Explorer
SEG Segment
SHARAD SHAllow RADar
Sig Gens Signal Generators
Sim Simulator
SIOS Science and Instrument Operations Subsystem
SNR Signal-to-Noise Ratio
Spec-A Spectrum Analyzer
SPLD South Polar Layered Deposits
SPOC Science Planning Operations Coordination
SpW SpaceWire
SRAM Static Random Access Memory
SSPG Strategic Science Planning Guide
STACER Spiral Tube and Actuator for Controlled Extension and Retraction
STALO STAble Local Oscillator
STB System Testbed
STEREO Solar Terrestrial Relations Observatory
SUDA SUrface Dust Analyzer
SVV Science Veriﬁcation and Validation
Synth Synthesizer Assembly
T/R Transmit/Receive
TEC Total Electron Content
Temp Temperature
TID Total Ionizing Dose
TLM Telemetry
TT Telltale
TT/T Telltale/Temps
TTL Transistor–transistor logic
TV AC Thermal Vacuum
Tx Transmit
Tx/Rx Transmit/Receive
TxDA Transmit Driver Assembly


--- PAGE 75 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page75of91    51 
UTIG University of Texas Institute for Geophysics
V&V Veriﬁcation and Validation
V AA Very High Frequency Antenna Assembly
V AAMXI Very High Frequency Antenna Assembly -X Inner
V AAMXI/O Very High Frequency Antenna Assembly -X Inner/Outer
V AAMXO Very High Frequency Antenna Assembly -X Outer
V AAPXI Very High Frequency Antenna Assembly +X Inner
V AAPXI/O Very High Frequency Antenna Assembly +X Inner/Outer
V AAPXO Very High Frequency Antenna Assembly +X Outer
VDD Positive supply voltage
VHF Very High Frequency
VHFPAU Very High Frequency Power Ampliﬁer Unit
VHFPSU Very High Frequency Power Supply Unit
VHFRx Very High Frequency Receivers Assembly
VHFS Very High Frequency Electronic Stack
VHFTxDA Very High Frequency Transmitters Distribution Assembly
WBS Work Breakdown Structure
Acknowledgements This work was supported by NASA through the Europa Clipper Project
(80NM0018F0615). The REASON radar was designed, built, and tested at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory,
California Institute of Technology, under a contract with the National Aeronautics and Space Administra-
tion (80NM0018D0004). REASON science was supported by a contract with Marshall Space Flight Center
(NNM16AA26C). This is UTIG contribution 3970. The contributions of Mauricio Sanchez-Barbetty, Duane
C. Howard, and Julie Newman were made during their time as employees of the Jet Propulsion Laboratory.
We acknowledge the support of the NASA Instrument Concepts for Europa Exploration (ICEE) program (13-
ICEE13-18) for the development and ﬁeld validation of techniques ultimately employed by the REASON
investigation and thank the G. Unger Vetlesen foundation for their contribution to validation of terrestrial
models for Europa’s ice shell. We would like to thank L3Harris Cincinnati Electronics Corporation and
Wenzel Associates for their dedication in developing and building the DPUs and Synthesizers, respectively.
Additionally, we would like to extend our gratitude to James Chinn, Wousik Kim, Allen Andersen, Dennis
Thorbourn, and Eduardo Martin of JPL as well as Stephen Brown, Kenneth O’Connor, and Robert Meloy of
GSFC for their invaluable help with IESD analysis and testing. We also want to thank the Space Simulator
Laboratory at APL for their support during the cryogenics test campaign. Finally, we are grateful to Sean
Peters, Anna Broome, and Thomas Teisberg for their feedback on this manuscript.
Declarations
Competing Interests The authors have no competing interests to declare that are relevant to the content of
this article.
OpenAccess This article is licensed under a Creative Commons Attribution 4.0 International License, which
permits use, sharing, adaptation, distribution and reproduction in any medium or format, as long as you give
appropriate credit to the original author(s) and the source, provide a link to the Creative Commons licence,
and indicate if changes were made. The images or other third party material in this article are included in the
article’s Creative Commons licence, unless indicated otherwise in a credit line to the material. If material is
not included in the article’s Creative Commons licence and your intended use is not permitted by statutory
regulation or exceeds the permitted use, you will need to obtain permission directly from the copyright holder.
To view a copy of this licence, visit http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/.
References
Abramov O, Spencer JR (2008) Numerical modeling of endogenic thermal anomalies on Europa. Icarus
195:378–385. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2007.11.027


--- PAGE 76 ---
   51 Page76of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
Abramov O, Rathbun JA, Schmidt BE, Spencer JR (2013) Detectability of thermal signatures associated with
active formation of ‘chaos terrain’ on Europa. Earth Planet Sci Lett 384:37–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.epsl.2013.09.027
Acton C, Bachman N, Semenov B, Wright E (2018) A look towards the future in the handling of space
science mission geometry. Planet Space Sci 150:9–12. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pss.2017.02.013
Aglyamov Y , Schroeder DM, Vance SD (2017) Bright prospects for radar detection of Europa’s ocean. Icarus
281:334–337. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2016.08.014
Alexander C, Carlson R, Consolmagno G, Greeley R, Morrison D (2009) The exploration history of Europa.
In: Pappalardo RT, McKinnon WB, Khurana KK (eds) Europa. University of Arizona Press, Tucson,
pp 3–26. https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctt1xp3wdw.7
Anderson J, Schubert G, Jacobson R, Lau E, Moore W, Sjogren W (1998) Europa’s differentiated inter-
nal structure: inferences from four Galileo encounters. Science 281:2019–2022 https://doi.org/10.1126/
science.281.5385.2019
Ashkenazy Y (2019) The surface temperature of Europa. Heliyon 5:e01908.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.heliyon.
2019.e01908
Ashmore DW, Bingham RG, Hindmarsh RCA, Corr HFJ, Joughin IR (2014) The relationship between sticky
spots and radar reﬂectivity beneath an active West Antarctic ice stream. Ann Glaciol 55:29–38. https://
doi.org/10.3189/2014AoG67A052
Bagenal F, Dols V (2020) The space environment of Io and Europa. J Geophys Res Space Phys
125:e2019JA027485. https://doi.org/10.1029/2019JA027485
Bagenal F, Wilson RJ, Siler S, Paterson WR, Kurth WS (2016) Survey of Galileo plasma observations in
Jupiter’s plasma sheet. J Geophys Res, Planets 121:871–894. https://doi.org/10.1002/2016JE005009
Bagenal F, Dougherty L, Bodisch K, Richardson J, Belcher J (2017) Survey of V oyager plasma science ions
at Jupiter: 1. Analysis method. J Geophys Res Space Phys 122:8241–8256. https://doi.org/10.1002/
2016JA023797
Bailey J, Evans S, Robin GdQ (1964) Radio echo sounding of polar ice sheets. Nature 204:420–421. https://
doi.org/10.1038/204420a0
Barr AC, Showman AP (2009) Heat transfer in Europa’s icy shell. In: Pappalardo RT, McKinnon WB, Khu-
rana KK (eds) Europa. University of Arizona Press, Tucson, pp 405–430. https://doi.org/10.2307/j.
ctt1xp3wdw.23
Becker HN, Lunine JI, Schenk PM, Florence MM, Brennan MJ, Hansen CJ, Martos YM, Bolton SJ,
Alexander JW (2023) A complex region of Europa’s surface with hints of recent activity revealed by
Juno’s Stellar Reference Unit. J Geophys Res, Planets 128:e2023JE008105. https://doi.org/10.1029/
2023JE008105
Bentley CR (1987) Antarctic ice streams: a review. J Geophys Res, Solid Earth 92:8843–8858. https://doi.
org/10.1029/JB092iB09p08843
Bentley C, Blankenship D, Moline G (1988) Electromagnetic studies on the Siple Coast, 1987–1988. Antarct
J U S 23:59–59
Bierhaus EB, Zahnle K, Chapman CR (2009) Europa’s crater distributions and surface ages. In: Pappalardo
RT, McKinnon WB, Khurana KK (eds) Europa. University of Arizona Press, Tucson, pp 161–180.
https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctt1xp3wdw.13
Bierson CJ, Tulaczyk S, Courville SW, Putzig NE (2021) Strong MARSIS radar reﬂections from the
base of Martian south polar cap may be due to conductive ice or minerals. Geophys Res Lett
48:e2021GL093880. https://doi.org/10.1029/2021GL093880
Billings SE, Kattenhorn SA (2005) The great thickness debate: ice shell thickness models for Europa and
comparisons with estimates based on ﬂexure at ridges. Icarus 177:397–412. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.
icarus.2005.03.013
Black GJ, Campbell DB, Nicholson PD (2001) Icy Galilean satellites: modeling radar reﬂectivities as a co-
herent backscatter effect. Icarus 151:167–180. https://doi.org/10.1006/icar.2001.6616
Blankenship D, Edwards B, Kim Y , Geissler P, Gurnett D, Johnson W, Kofman W, Moore J, Morse D, Pap-
palardo R (1999) Feasibility study and design concept for an orbiting ice-penetrating radar sounder to
characterize in three-dimensions the Europan ice mantle down to (and including) any ice/ocean inter-
face. Institute for Geophysics
Blankenship D, Morse D, Finn C, Bell R, Peters M, Kempf S, Hodge S, Studinger M, Behrendt JC, Brozena
J (2001) Geologic controls on the initiation of rapid basal motion for West Antarctic ice streams: a
geophysical perspective including new airborne radar sounding and laser altimetry results. West Antarct
Ice Sheet Behav Environ 77:105–121. https://doi.org/10.1029/AR077p0105
Blankenship DD, Young DA, Moore WB, Moore JC (2009) Radar sounding of Europa’s subsurface properties
and processes: the view from Earth. In: Pappalardo RT, McKinnon WB, Khurana KK (eds) Europa.
University of Arizona Press, Tucson, pp 631–654. https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctt1xp3wdw.33


--- PAGE 77 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page77of91    51 
Brown W Jr, Adams G, Eggleton R, Jackson P, Jordan R, Kobrick M, Peeples W, Phillips R, Porcello L,
Schaber G (1974) Elevation proﬁles of the Moon. In: Proceedings of the Fifth Lunar Conference. vol 3,
pp 3037–3048
Brown G (1977) The average impulse response of a rough surface and its applications. IEEE Trans Antennas
Propag 25:67–74. https://doi.org/10.1109/TAP.1977.1141536
Brown DW (2021) The mission: a true story. Harper Collins, New York
Brown M, Hand K (2013) Salts and radiation products on the surface of Europa. Astron J 145:110. https://
doi.org/10.1088/0004-6256/145/4/110
Bruzzone L, Alberti G, Catallo C, Ferro A, Kofman W, Orosei R (2011) Subsurface radar sounding of the
Jovian moon Ganymede. Proc IEEE 99:837–857. https://doi.org/10.1109/JPROC.2011.2108990
Bruzzone L, Plaut JJ, Alberti G, Blankenship DD, Bovolo F, Campbell BA, Ferro A, Gim Y , Kofman W,
Komatsu G, McKinnon W, Mitri G, Orosei R, Patterson GW, Plettemeier D, Seu R (2013) RIME: radar
for icy moon exploration. In: 2013 IEEE international geoscience and remote sensing symposium -
IGARSS, pp 3907–3910. https://doi.org/10.1109/IGARSS.2013.6723686
Buffo JJ, Schmidt BE, Huber C, Walker CC (2020) Entrainment and dynamics of ocean-derived impuri-
ties within Europa’s Ice Shell. J Geophys Res, Planets 125:e2020JE006394. https://doi.org/10.1029/
2020JE006394
Campbell BA (2009) Scale-dependent surface roughness behavior and its impact on empirical models for
radar backscatter. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 47:3480–3488.https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2009.
2022752
Campbell BA, Morgan GA (2018) Fine-scale layering of Mars polar deposits and signatures of ice content in
nonpolar material from multiband SHARAD data processing. Geophys Res Lett 45:1759–1766. https://
doi.org/10.1002/2017GL075844
Campbell BA, Watters TR (2016) Phase compensation of MARSIS subsurface sounding data and estimation
of ionospheric properties: new insights from SHARAD results. J Geophys Res, Planets 121:180–193.
https://doi.org/10.1002/2015JE004917
Campbell BA, Putzig NE, Carter LM, Phillips RJ (2011) Autofocus correction of phase distortion effects
on SHARAD echoes. IEEE Geosci Remote Sens Lett 8:939–942. https://doi.org/10.1109/LGRS.2011.
2143692
Campbell BA, Putzig NE, Carter LM, Morgan GA, Phillips RJ, Plaut JJ (2013a) Roughness and near-surface
density of Mars from SHARAD radar echoes. J Geophys Res, Planets 118:436–450. https://doi.org/10.
1002/jgre.20050
Campbell BA, Putzig NE, Foss FJ Phillips RJ (2013b) SHARAD signal attenuation and delay offsets due
to the Martian ionosphere. IEEE Geosci Remote Sens Lett 11:632–635. https://doi.org/10.1109/LGRS.
2013.2273396
Carlson R, Johnson R, Anderson M (1999) Sulfuric acid on Europa and the radiolytic sulfur cycle. Science
286:97–99. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.286.5437.97
Carlson R, Anderson M, Johnson R, Schulman M, Yavrouian A (2002) Sulfuric acid production on Europa:
the radiolysis of sulfur in water ice. Icarus 157:456–463. https://doi.org/10.1006/icar.2002.6858
Carnahan E, Wolfenbarger NS, Jordan JS, Hesse MA (2021) New insights into temperature-dependent ice
properties and their effect on ice shell convection for icy ocean worlds. Earth Planet Sci Lett 563:116886.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2021.116886
Carnahan E, Vance SD, Cox R, Hesse MA (2022) Surface-to-ocean exchange by the sinking of impact
generated melt chambers on Europa. Geophys Res Lett 49:e2022GL100287. https://doi.org/10.1029/
2022GL100287
Carr MH, Belton MJS, Chapman CR, Davies ME, Geissler P, Greenberg R, McEwen AS, Tufts BR, Greeley
R, Sullivan R, Head JW, Pappalardo RT, Klaasen KP, Johnson TV , Kaufman J, Senske D, Moore J,
Neukum G, Schubert G, Burns JA, Thomas P, Veverka J (1998) Evidence for a subsurface ocean on
Europa. Nature 391:363–365. https://doi.org/10.1038/34857
Carrer L, Schroeder DM, Romero-Wolf A, Ries P, Brurzone L (2018) Noise character constraints on passive
radio sounding of Jupiter’s icy moons using Jovian decametric radiation. In: IGARSS 2018 - 2018
IEEE international geoscience and remote sensing symposium, pp 4158–4161. https://doi.org/10.1109/
IGARSS.2018.8517931
Carrer L, Schroeder DM, Romero-Wolf A, Ries PA, Bruzzone L (2021) Analysis of temporal and structural
characteristics of Jovian radio emissions for passive radar sounding of Jupiter’s Icy Moons. IEEE Trans
Geosci Remote Sens 59:3857–3874. https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2020.3023249
Cartacci M, Amata E, Cicchetti A, Noschese R, Giuppi S, Langlais B, Frigeri A, Orosei R, Picardi G (2013)
Mars ionosphere total electron content analysis from MARSIS subsurface data. Icarus 223:423–437.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2012.12.011
Carter SP, Blankenship DD, Peters ME, Young DA, Holt JW, Morse DL (2007) Radar-based sub-
glacial lake classiﬁcation in Antarctica. Geochem Geophys Geosyst 8:Q03016. https://doi.org/10.1029/
2006GC001408


--- PAGE 78 ---
   51 Page78of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
Cassen P, Reynolds RT, Peale SJ (1979) Is there liquid water on Europa? Geophys Res Lett 6:731–734.https://
doi.org/10.1029/GL006i009p00731
Castelletti D, Schroeder DM, Hensley S, Grima C, Ng G, Young D, Gim Y , Bruzzone L, Moussessian A,
Blankenship DD (2017) An interferometric approach to cross-track clutter detection in two-channel
VHF radar sounders. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 55:6128–6140. https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.
2017.2721433
Castelletti D, Schroeder DM, Mantelli E, Hilger A (2019) Layer optimized SAR processing and slope esti-
mation in radar sounder data. J Glaciol 65:983–988. https://doi.org/10.1017/jog.2019.72
Cavitte MGP, Blankenship DD, Young DA, Schroeder DM, Parrenin F, Lemeur E, Macgregor JA, Siegert
MJ (2016) Deep radiostratigraphy of the East Antarctic Plateau: connecting the Dome C and V ostok ice
core sites. J Glaciol 62:323–334. https://doi.org/10.1017/jog.2016.11
Cecconi B, Hess S, Hérique A, Santovito MR, Santos-Costa D, Zarka P, Alberti G, Blankenship D, Bougeret
J-L, Bruzzone L, Kofman W (2012) Natural radio emission of Jupiter as interferences for radar investi-
gations of the icy satellites of Jupiter. Planet Space Sci 61:32–45.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pss.2011.06.
012
Chan K, Grima C, Gerekos C, Blankenship DD (2023a) RIME-REASON synergistic opportunities for sur-
face and near-surface investigations of icy moons. In: EGU General Assembly Conference Abstracts,
pp EGU–10554. https://doi.org/10.5194/egusphere-egu23-10554
Chan K, Grima C, Rutishauser A, Young DA, Culberg R, Blankenship DD (2023b) Spatial characterization
of near-surface structure and meltwater runoff conditions across the Devon Ice Cap from dual-frequency
radar reﬂectivity. Cryosphere 17:1839–1852. https://doi.org/10.5194/tc-17-1839-2023
Chivers CJ, Buffo JJ, Schmidt BE (2021) Thermal and chemical evolution of small, shallow water
bodies in Europa’s Ice Shell. J Geophys Res, Planets 126:e2020JE006692. https://doi.org/10.1029/
2020JE006692
Choudhary P, Holt JW, Kempf SD (2016) Surface clutter and echo location analysis for the interpretation
of SHARAD data from Mars. IEEE Geosci Remote Sens Lett 13:1285–1289. https://doi.org/10.1109/
LGRS.2016.2581799
Choukroun M, Molaro JL, Hodyss R, Marteau E, Backes P, Carey EM, Dhaouadi W, Moreland S, Schulson
EM (2020) Strength evolution of ice plume deposit analogs of Enceladus and Europa. Geophys Res Lett
47:e2020GL088953. https://doi.org/10.1029/2020GL088953
Christensen PR, Spencer JR, Mehall GL et al (2024) The Europa Thermal Emission Imaging System (E-
THEMIS) investigation for the Europa Clipper Mission. Space Sci Rev 220. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11214-024-01074-1
Christianson K, Jacobel RW, Horgan HJ, Alley RB, Anandakrishnan S, Holland DM, DallaSanta KJ (2016)
Basal conditions at the grounding zone of Whillans Ice Stream, West Antarctica, from ice-penetrating
radar. J Geophys Res, Earth Surf 121:1954–1983. https://doi.org/10.1002/2015JF003806
Chu W, Schroeder DM, Siegfried MR (2018) Retrieval of englacial ﬁrn aquifer thickness from ice-penetrating
radar sounding in southeastern Greenland. Geophys Res Lett 45:11,770–11,778.https://doi.org/10.1029/
2018GL079751
Chu W, Hilger AM, Culberg R, Schroeder DM, Jordan TM, Seroussi H, Young DA, Blankenship DD,
Vaughan DG (2021) Multisystem synthesis of radar sounding observations of the Amundsen sea sector
from the 2004–2005 ﬁeld season. J Geophys Res, Earth Surf 126:e2021JF006296. https://doi.org/10.
1029/2021JF006296
Chuah TS (1996) Design and development of a coherent radar depth sounder for measurement of Greenland
ice sheet thickness. RSL Technical Report 10470-5. University of Kansas
Chyba CF (2000) Energy for microbial life on Europa. Nature 403:381–382. https://doi.org/10.1038/
35000281
Chyba CF, Ostro SJ, Edwards BC (1998) Radar detectability of a subsurface ocean on Europa. Icarus
134:292–302. https://doi.org/10.1006/icar.1998.5961
Clark K, Tan-Wang G, Boldt J, Greeley R, Jun I, Lock R, Ludwinski J, Pappalardo R, Van Houten T, Yan
T (2009) Return to Europa: overview of the Jupiter Europa orbiter mission. In: 2009 IEEE Aerospace
Conference, pp 1–20. https://doi.org/10.1109/AERO.2009.4839315
Collins G, Nimmo F (2009) Chaotic terrain on Europa. In: Pappalardo RT, McKinnon WB, Khurana KK (eds)
Europa. University of Arizona Press, Tucson, pp 259–281. https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctt1xp3wdw.17
Collins GC, Head III JW, Pappalardo RT, Spaun NA (2000) Evaluation of models for the formation of chaotic
terrain on Europa. J Geophys Res, Planets 105:1709–1716. https://doi.org/10.1029/1999JE001143
Cooper A, Mclntyre N, Robin GdQ (1982) Driving stresses in the Antarctic ice sheet. Ann Glaciol 3:59–64.
https://doi.org/10.3189/S0260305500002536
Cosciotti B, Mattei E, Brin A, Lauro SE, Stillman DE, Cunje A, Hickson D, Caprarelli G, Pettinelli E (2023)
Can clay mimic the high reﬂectivity of briny water below the Martian SPLD? J Geophys Res, Planets
128:e2022JE007513. https://doi.org/10.1029/2022JE007513


--- PAGE 79 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page79of91    51 
Costello ES, Phillips CB, Lucey PG, Ghent RR (2021) Impact gardening on Europa and repercussions for
possible biosignatures. Nat Astron 5:951–956. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41550-021-01393-1
Cox R, Bauer AW (2015) Impact breaching of Europa’s ice: constraints from numerical modeling. J Geophys
Res, Planets 120:1708–1719. https://doi.org/10.1002/2015JE004877
Crabtree R, Doake C (1986) Radio-echo investigations of Ronne Ice Shelf. Ann Glaciol 8:37–41. https://doi.
org/10.3189/S0260305500001105
Craft KL, Patterson GW, Lowell RP, Germanovich L (2016) Fracturing and ﬂow: investigations on the for-
mation of shallow water sills on Europa. Icarus 274:297–313. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2016.01.
023
Croci R, Seu R, Flamini E, Russo E (2011) The SHAllow RADar (SHARAD) onboard the NASA MRO
mission. In: Proc IEEE, vol 99, pp 794–807. https://doi.org/10.1109/JPROC.2010.2104130
Culberg R, Schroeder DM (2020) Firn clutter constraints on the design and performance of orbital radar
ice sounders. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 58:6344–6361. https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2020.
2976666
Culberg R, Schroeder DM, Steinbrügge G (2022) Double ridge formation over shallow water sills on Jupiter’s
moon Europa. Nat Commun 13:2007. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-29458-3
Culha C, Schroeder DM, Jordan TM, Haynes MS (2020) Assessing the detectability of Europa’s eutectic
zone using radar sounding. Icarus 339:113578. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2019.113578
Cumming IG, Wong FH (2005) Digital processing of Synthetic Aperture Radar data. Artech House
1:108–110
Daubar IJ, Hayes AG, Collins GC et al (2024) Planned geological investigations of the Europa Clipper Mis-
sion. Space Sci Rev 220:18. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11214-023-01036-z
de Oliveira-Costa A, Tegmark M, Gaensler B, Jonas J, Landecker T, Reich P (2008) A model of diffuse
galactic radio emission from 10 MHz to 100 GHz. Mon Not R Astron Soc 388:247–260.https://doi.org/
10.1111/j.1365-2966.2008.13376.x
Doggett T, Greeley R, Figueredo P, Tanaka K (2009) Geologic stratigraphy and evolution of Europa’s surface.
In: Pappalardo RT, McKinnon WB, Khurana KK (eds) Europa. University of Arizona Press, Tucson,
pp 137–160. https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctt1xp3wdw.12
Dombard AJ, Patterson GW, Lederer AP, Prockter LM (2013) Flanking fractures and the formation of double
ridges on Europa. Icarus 223:74–81. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2012.11.021
Dowell J, Taylor GB, Schinzel FK, Kassim NE, Stovall K (2017) The LW A1 low frequency sky survey. Mon
Not R Astron Soc 469:4537–4550. https://doi.org/10.1093/mnras/stx1136
Drewry DJ (1983) Antarctica: glaciological and geophysical folio. University of Cambridge, Scott Polar
Research Institute
Eluszkiewicz J (2004) Dim prospects for radar detection of Europa’s ocean. Icarus 170:234–236. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.icarus.2004.02.011
Engelhardt H, Determann J (1987) Borehole evidence for a thick layer of basal ice in the central Ronne Ice
Shelf. Nature 327:318–319. https://doi.org/10.1038/327318a0
Evans S (1963) Radio techniques for the measurement of ice thickness. Polar Rec 11:406–410. https://doi.
org/10.1017/S0032247400053523
Ewert H, Popov SV , Richter A, Schwabe J, Scheinert M, Dietrich R (2012) Precise analysis of ICESat al-
timetry data and assessment of the hydrostatic equilibrium for subglacial Lake V ostok, East Antarctica.
Geophys J Int 191:557–568. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1365-246X.2012.05649.x
Fagents SA (2003) Considerations for effusive cryovolcanism on Europa: the post-Galileo perspective. J
Geophys Res, Planets 108:E12. https://doi.org/10.1029/2003JE002128
Fagents SA, Greeley R, Sullivan RJ, Pappalardo RT Prockter LM, The Galileo SSI Team (2000) Cryomag-
matic mechanisms for the formation of rhadamanthys linea, triple band margins, and other low-albedo
features on Europa. Icarus 144:54–88. https://doi.org/10.1006/icar.1999.6254
Ferro A (2019) Squinted SAR focusing for improving automatic radar sounder data analysis and enhance-
ment. Int J Remote Sens 40:4762–4786. https://doi.org/10.1080/01431161.2019.1573339
Fischer PD, Brown ME, Hand KP (2015) Spatially resolved spectroscopy of Europa: the distinct spectrum of
large-scale chaos. Astron J 150:164. https://doi.org/10.1088/0004-6256/150/5/164
Franke S, Jansen D, Beyer S, Neckel N, Binder T, Paden J, Eisen O (2021) Complex basal conditions and
their inﬂuence on ice ﬂow at the onset of the northeast Greenland ice stream. J Geophys Res, Earth Surf
126:e2020JF005689. https://doi.org/10.1029/2020JF005689
Frémand AC, Fretwell P, Bodart JA, Pritchard HD, Aitken A, Bamber JL, Bell R, Bianchi C, Bingham RG,
Blankenship DD (2023) Antarctic bedmap data: ﬁndable, accessible, interoperable, and reusable (FAIR)
sharing of 60 years of ice bed, surface, and thickness data. Earth Syst Sci Data 15:2695–2710. https://
doi.org/10.5194/essd-15-2695-2023
Fretwell P, Pritchard HD, Vaughan DG, Bamber JL, Barrand NE, Bell R, Bianchi C, Bingham RG, Blanken-
ship DD, Casassa G, Catania G, Callens D, Conway H, Cook AJ, Corr HFJ, Damaske D, Damm V ,


--- PAGE 80 ---
   51 Page80of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
Ferraccioli F, Forsberg R, Fujita S, Gim Y , Gogineni P, Griggs JA, Hindmarsh RCA, Holmlund P, Holt
JW, Jacobel RW, Jenkins A, Jokat W, Jordan T, King EC, Kohler J, Krabill W, Riger-Kusk M, Lan-
gley KA, Leitchenkov G, Leuschen C, Luyendyk BP, Matsuoka K, Mouginot J, Nitsche FO, Nogi Y ,
Nost OA, Popov SV , Rignot E, Rippin DM, Rivera A, Roberts J, Ross N, Siegert MJ, Smith AM,
Steinhage D, Studinger M, Sun B, Tinto BK, Welch BC, Wilson D, Young DA, Xiangbin C, Ziriz-
zotti A (2013) Bedmap2: improved ice bed, surface and thickness datasets for Antarctica. Cryosphere
7:375–393. https://doi.org/10.5194/tc-7-375-2013
Fricker HA, Padman L (2012) Thirty years of elevation change on Antarctic Peninsula ice shelves. J Geophys
Res, Oceans 117:C2. https://doi.org/10.1029/2011JC007126
Fricker HA, Popov S, Allison I, Young N (2001) Distribution of marine ice beneath the Amery Ice Shelf.
Geophys Res Lett 28:2241–2244. https://doi.org/10.1029/2000GL012461
Fujita S, Matsuoka T, Ishida T, Matsuoka K, Mae S (2000) A summary of the complex dielectric permittivity
of ice in the megahertz range and its applications for radar sounding of polar ice sheets. Hokkaido
University Press, pp 185–212
Fung AK, Li Z, Chen KS (1992) Backscattering from a randomly rough dielectric surface. IEEE Trans Geosci
Remote Sens 30:356–369. https://doi.org/10.1109/36.134085
Gaidos EJ, Nimmo F (2000) Tectonics and water on Europa. Nature 405:637–637. https://doi.org/10.1038/
35015170
Gassot O, Herique A, Kofman W, Cecconi B, Witasse O (2022) Performances of the passive SAR imaging
of Jupiter’s Icy Moons. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 60:1–13. https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2022.
3172633
Gerekos C, Bruzzone L, Imai M (2020) A coherent method for simulating active and passive radar sounding of
the Jovian Icy Moons. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 58:2250–2265. https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.
2019.2945079
Gerekos C, Steinbrügge G, Jebaraj IC, Casillas A, Donini E, Sánchez-Cano B, Lester M, Magdaleni´c J, Peters
ST, Romero-Wolf AF, Blankenship DD (2024) Observation of solar radio burst events from Mars or-
bit with the Shallow Radar instrument. Astron Astrophys 683:A56. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/
202347900
Gogineni S, Chuah T, Allen C, Jezek K, Moore RK (1998) An improved coherent radar depth sounder. J
Glaciol 44:659–669. https://doi.org/10.3189/S0022143000002161
Goldsby DL, Kohlstedt DL (2001) Superplastic deformation of ice: experimental observations. J Geophys
Res, Solid Earth 106:11017–11030. https://doi.org/10.1029/2000JB900336
Grasset O, Dougherty M, Coustenis A, Bunce E, Erd C, Titov D, Blanc M, Coates A, Drossart P, Fletcher L
(2013) JUpiter ICy moons Explorer (JUICE): an ESA mission to orbit Ganymede and to characterise
the Jupiter system. Planet Space Sci 78:1–21. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pss.2012.12.002
Greely R, Johnson T (2004) The jupitor icy moons orbiter project: the scientiﬁc rationale. Eos Trans AGU
85:337–343. https://doi.org/10.1029/2004EO360001
Greenberg R, Hoppa GV , Tufts BR, Geissler P, Riley J, Kadel S (1999) Chaos on Europa. Icarus 141:263–286.
https://doi.org/10.1006/icar.1999.6187
Grima C, Blankenship DD, Young DA, Schroeder DM (2014a) Surface slope control on ﬁrn den-
sity at Thwaites Glacier, West Antarctica: results from airborne radar sounding. Geophys Res Lett
41:6787–6794. https://doi.org/10.1002/2014GL061635
Grima C, Schroeder DM, Blankenship DD, Young DA (2014b) Planetary landing-zone reconnaissance using
ice-penetrating radar data: concept validation in Antarctica. Planet Space Sci 103:191–204. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.pss.2014.07.018
Grima C, Blankenship DD, Schroeder DM (2015) Radar signal propagation through the ionosphere of Eu-
ropa. Planet Space Sci 117:421–428. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pss.2015.08.017
Grima C, Greenbaum JS, Lopez Garcia EJ, Soderlund KM, Rosales A, Blankenship DD, Young DA (2016)
Radar detection of the brine extent at McMurdo Ice Shelf, Antarctica, and its control by snow accumu-
lation. Geophys Res Lett 43:7011–7018. https://doi.org/10.1002/2016GL069524
Grima C, Mastrogiuseppe M, Hayes AG, Wall SD, Lorenz RD, Hofgartner JD, Stiles B, Elachi C, Cassini
RADAR Team (2017) Surface roughness of Titan’s hydrocarbon seas. Earth Planet Sci Lett 474:20–24.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2017.06.007
Grima C, Koch I, Greenbaum J, Soderlund K, Blankenship D, Young D, Schroeder D, Fitzsimons S (2019)
Surface and basal boundary conditions at the southern McMurdo and Ross Ice Shelves, Antarctica. J
Glaciol 65:675–688. https://doi.org/10.1017/jog.2019.44
Grima C, Mouginot J, Kofman W, Hérique A, Beck P (2022a) The basal detectability of an ice-covered Mars
by MARSIS. Geophys Res Lett 49:e2021GL096518. https://doi.org/10.1029/2021GL096518
Grima C, Putzig NE, Campbell BA, Perry M, Gulick SPS, Miller RC, Russell AT, Scanlan KM, Steinbrügge
G, Young DA, Kempf SD, Ng G, Buhl D, Blankenship DD (2022b) Investigating the Martian surface at
decametric scale: population, distribution, and dimension of heterogeneity from radar statistics. Planet
Sci J 3:236. https://doi.org/10.3847/PSJ/ac9277


--- PAGE 81 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page81of91    51 
Grimm R, Stillman D (2019) On the electrical properties of meridianiite and implications for radar sounding
of icy satellites. Earth Planet Sci Lett 520:34–39. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2019.05.010
Grimm RE, Stillman DE, Dec SF, Bullock MA (2008) Low-frequency electrical properties of polycrystalline
saline ice and salt hydrates. J Phys Chem B 112:15382–15390. https://doi.org/10.1021/jp8055366
Gross GW, Wong PM, Humes K (1977) Concentration dependent solute redistribution at the ice–water phase
boundary. III. Spontaneous convection. Chloride solutions. J Chem Phys 67:5264–5274.https://doi.org/
10.1063/1.434704
Gudmandsen P (1969) Airborne radio echo sounding of the Greenland Ice Sheet. Geogr J 135:548–551.
https://doi.org/10.2307/1795099
Gurnett DA, Kurth WS, Roux A, Bolton SJ, Thomsen EA, Groene JB (1998) Galileo plasma wave observa-
tions near Europa. Geophys Res Lett 25:237–240. https://doi.org/10.1029/97GL03706
Hammond N (2020) Estimating the Magnitude of Cyclic Slip on Strike-Slip faults on Europa. J Geophys Res,
Planets 125:7. https://doi.org/10.1029/2019JE006170
Hand KP, Carlson RW, Chyba CF (2007) Energy, chemical disequilibrium, and geological constraints on
Europa. Astrobiology 7:1006–1022. https://doi.org/10.1089/ast.2007.0156
Hand KP, Chyba CF, Priscu JC, Carlson RW, Nealson KH (2009) Astrobiology and the potential for life on
Europa. In: Pappalardo RT, McKinnon WB, Khurana KK (eds) Europa. University of Arizona Press,
Tucson, pp 589–630. https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctt1xp3wdw.32
Haynes MS, Chapin E, Moussessian A, Madsen SN (2018a) Surface clutter discrimination analysis for radar
sounding interferometry. IEEE Trans Aerosp Electron Syst 55:989–1003.https://doi.org/10.1109/TAES.
2018.2867689
Haynes MS, Chapin E, Schroeder DM (2018b) Geometric power fall-off in radar sounding. IEEE Trans
Geosci Remote Sens 56:6571–6585. https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2018.2840511
Head JW, Pappalardo RT (1999) Brine mobilization during lithospheric heating on Europa: implica-
tions for formation of chaos terrain, lenticula texture, and color variations. J Geophys Res, Planets
104:27143–27155. https://doi.org/10.1029/1999JE001062
Head JW, Pappalardo RT, Sullivan R (1999) Europa: morphological characteristics of ridges and triple bands
from Galileo data (E4 and E6) and assessment of a linear diapirism model. J Geophys Res, Planets
104:24223–24236. https://doi.org/10.1029/1998JE001011
Heister A, Scheiber R (2018) Coherent large beamwidth processing of radio-echo sounding data. Cryosphere
12:2969–2979. https://doi.org/10.5194/tc-12-2969-2018
Hills BH, Christianson K, Holschuh N (2020) A framework for attenuation method selection evaluated with
ice-penetrating radar data at South Pole Lake. Ann Glaciol 61:176–187. https://doi.org/10.1017/aog.
2020.32
Holt JW, Safaeinili A, Plaut JJ, Head JW, Phillips RJ, Seu R, Kempf SD, Choudhary P, Young DA, Putzig
NE, Biccari D, Gim Y (2008) Radar sounding evidence for buried glaciers in the southern mid-latitudes
of Mars. Science 322:1235–1238. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1164246
Horgan HJ, Anandakrishnan S, Jacobel RW, Christianson K, Alley RB, Heeszel DS, Picotti S, Walter JI
(2012) Subglacial lake Whillans — seismic observations of a shallow active reservoir beneath a West
Antarctic ice stream. Earth Planet Sci Lett 331–332:201–209. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2012.02.
023
Howell SM (2021) The likely thickness of Europa’s icy shell. Planet Sci J 2:129.https://doi.org/10.3847/PSJ/
abfe10
Hughes JS, Crichton D, Hardman S, Law E, Joyner R, Ramirez P (2014) PDS4: a model-driven planetary
science data architecture for long-term preservation. In: 2014 IEEE 30th international conference on
data engineering workshops, pp 134–141. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDEW.2014.6818317
Humbert A, Steinhage D, Helm V , Beyer S, Kleiner T (2018) Missing evidence of widespread subglacial
lakes at recovery glacier, Antarctica. J Geophys Res, Earth Surf 123:2802–2826.https://doi.org/10.1029/
2017JF004591
Humphrey NF, Harper JT, Pfeffer WT (2012) Thermal tracking of meltwater retention in Greenland’s accu-
mulation area. J Geophys Res, Earth Surf 117:F1. https://doi.org/10.1029/2011JF002083
Hussmann H, Shoji D, Steinbrügge G, Stark A, Sohl F (2016) Constraints on dissipation in the deep interiors
of Ganymede and Europa from tidal phase-lags. Celest Mech Dyn Astron 126:131–144. https://doi.org/
10.1007/s10569-016-9721-0
Ilisei A-M, Khodadadzadeh M, Ferro A, Bruzzone L (2019) An automatic method for subglacial lake detec-
tion in ice sheet radar sounder data. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 57:3252–3270. https://doi.org/10.
1109/TGRS.2018.2882911
Jebaraj IC, Magdaleni´c J, Podladchikova T, Scolini C, Pomoell J, Veronig AM, Dissauer K, Krupar V , Kilpua
EKJ, Poedts S (2020) Using radio triangulation to understand the origin of two subsequent type II radio
bursts. Astron Astrophys 639:A56. https://doi.org/10.1051/0004-6361/201937273


--- PAGE 82 ---
   51 Page82of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
Jenkins A, Doake C (1991) Ice-ocean interaction on Ronne Ice Shelf, Antarctica. J Geophys Res, Oceans
96:791–813. https://doi.org/10.1029/90JC01952
Jezek KC (1984) A modiﬁed theory of bottom crevasses used as a means for measuring the buttressing effect
of ice shelves on inland ice sheets. J Geophys Res, Solid Earth 89:1925–1931. https://doi.org/10.1029/
JB089iB03p01925
Jezek KC, Bentley CR (1983) Field studies of bottom crevasses in the Ross Ice Shelf, Antarctica. J Glaciol
29:118–126. https://doi.org/10.3189/S0022143000005189
Jezek KC, Bentley CR, Clough JW (1979) Electromagnetic sounding of bottom crevasses on the Ross Ice
Shelf, Antarctica. J Glaciol 24:321–330. https://doi.org/10.3189/S0022143000014842
Jia X, Kivelson MG, Khurana KK, Kurth WS (2018) Evidence of a plume on Europa from Galileo magnetic
and plasma wave signatures. Nat Astron 2:459–464. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41550-018-0450-z
Johnston SA, Montési LG (2014) Formation of ridges on Europa above crystallizing water bodies inside the
ice shell. Icarus 237:190–201. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2014.04.026
Jordan R, Picardi G, Plaut J, Wheeler K, Kirchner D, Safaeinili A, Johnson W, Seu R, Calabrese D, Zampolini
E, Cicchetti A, Huff R, Gurnett D, Ivanov A, Kofman W, Orosei R, Thompson T, Edenhofer P, Bombaci
O (2009) The Mars Express MARSIS sounder instrument. Planet Space Sci 57:1975–1986. https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.pss.2009.09.016
Jordan TM, Cooper MA, Schroeder DM, Williams CN, Paden JD, Siegert MJ, Bamber JL (2017) Self-afﬁne
subglacial roughness: consequences for radar scattering and basal water discrimination in northern
Greenland. Cryosphere 11:1247–1264. https://doi.org/10.5194/tc-11-1247-2017
Jordan TM, Williams CN, Schroeder DM, Martos YM, Cooper MA, Siegert MJ, Paden JD, Huybrechts P,
Bamber JL (2018) A constraint upon the basal water distribution and thermal state of the Greenland Ice
Sheet from radar bed echoes. Cryosphere 12:2831–2854. https://doi.org/10.5194/tc-12-2831-2018
Joughin I, Vaughan DG (2004) Marine ice beneath the Filchner–Ronne Ice Shelf, Antarctica: a
comparison of estimated thickness distributions. Ann Glaciol 39:511–517. https://doi.org/10.3189/
172756404781814717
Kalousová K, Souˇcek O, Tobie G, Choblet G,ˇCadek O (2016) Water generation and transport below Europa’s
strike-slip faults. J Geophys Res, Planets 121:2444–2462. https://doi.org/10.1002/2016JE005188
Kalousová K, Schroeder DM, Soderlund KM (2017) Radar attenuation in Europa’s ice shell: obstacles and
opportunities for constraining the shell thickness and its thermal structure. J Geophys Res, Planets
122:524–545. https://doi.org/10.1002/2016JE005110
Kapitsa A, Ridley J, Robin GdQ, Siegert M, Zotikov I (1996) A large deep freshwater lake beneath the ice of
central East Antarctica. Nature 381:684–686. https://doi.org/10.1038/381684a0
Kargel JS (1991) Brine volcanism and the interior structures of asteroids and icy satellites. Icarus 94:368–390.
https://doi.org/10.1016/0019-1035(91)90235-L
Kattenhorn SA, Hurford T (2009) Tectonics of Europa. In: Pappalardo RT, McKinnon WB, Khurana KK (eds)
Europa. University of Arizona Press, Tucson, pp 199–236. https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctt1xp3wdw.15
Khurana K, Kivelson M, Stevenson D, Schubert G, Russell C, Walker R, Polanskey C (1998) Induced mag-
netic ﬁelds as evidence for subsurface oceans in Europa and Callisto. Nature 395:777–780. https://doi.
org/10.1038/27394
Kim W, Chinn JZ, Jun I, Garrett HB (2019) Approach for Deﬁning Internal Electrostatic Discharge Design
Environment of a Jovian Mission. In: 2019 19th European Conference on Radiation and Its Effects on
Components and Systems (RADECS). pp 1–3. https://doi.org/10.1109/RADECS47380.2019.9745730
Kivelson MG, Khurana KK, Russell CT, V olwerk M, Walker RJ, Zimmer C (2000) Galileo magnetometer
measurements: a stronger case for a subsurface ocean at Europa. Science 289:1340–1343. https://doi.
org/10.1126/science.289.5483.1340
Kliore AJ, Hinson DP, Flasar FM, Nagy AF, Cravens TE (1997) The ionosphere of Europa from Galileo radio
occultations. Science 277:355–358. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.277.5324.355
Kobayashi T, Kim J-H, Lee SR, Kumamoto A, Nakagawa H, Oshigami S, Oya H, Yamaguchi Y , Yamaji
A, Ono T (2011) Synthetic Aperture Radar processing of Kaguya lunar radar sounder data for lunar
subsurface imaging. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 50:2161–2174. https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.
2011.2171349
Kofman W, Orosei R, Pettinelli E (2010) Radar signal propagation and detection through ice. Space Sci Rev
153:249–271. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11214-010-9642-2
Kurth W, Gurnett D, Persoon A, Roux A, Bolton S, Alexander C (2001) The plasma wave environment of
Europa. Planet Space Sci 49:345–363. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0032-0633(00)00156-2
Kwok R, Johnson WT (1989) Block adaptive quantization of Magellan SAR data. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote
Sens 27:375–383. https://doi.org/10.1109/36.29557
Lalich D, Hayes A, Poggiali V (2022) Explaining bright radar reﬂections below the south pole of Mars
without liquid water. Nat Astron 6:1142–1146. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41550-022-01775-z


--- PAGE 83 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page83of91    51 
Lambrecht A, Sandhäger H, Vaughan DG, Mayer C (2007) New ice thickness maps of Filchner–Ronne Ice
Shelf, Antarctica, with speciﬁc focus on grounding lines and marine ice. Antarct Sci 19:521–532.https://
doi.org/10.1017/S0954102007000661
Lauro SE, Pettinelli E, Caprarelli G, Guallini L, Rossi AP, Mattei E, Cosciotti B, Cicchetti A, Soldovieri F,
Cartacci M, Di Paolo F, Noschese R, Orosei R (2021) Multiple subglacial water bodies below the south
pole of Mars unveiled by new MARSIS data. Nat Astron 5:63–70. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41550-020-
1200-6
Lauro SE, Pettinelli E, Caprarelli G, Baniamerian J, Mattei E, Cosciotti B, Stillman DE, Primm KM, Sol-
dovieri F, Orosei R (2022) Using MARSIS signal attenuation to assess the presence of south polar
layered deposit subglacial brines. Nat Commun 13:5686. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-022-33389-4
Lauro SE, Pettinelli E, Caprarelli G, Guallini L, Rossi AP, Mattei E, Cosciotti B, Cicchetti A, Soldovieri F,
Cartacci M (2023) Reply to: Explaining bright radar reﬂections below the south pole of Mars without
liquid water. Nat Astron 7:259–261. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41550-022-01871-0
Legarsky JJ, Gogineni SP, Akins TL (2001) Focused Synthetic Aperture Radar processing of ice-sounder data
collected over the Greenland ice sheet. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 39:2109–2117.https://doi.org/
10.1109/36.957274
Lesage E, Massol H, Howell SM, Schmidt F (2022) Simulation of freezing cryomagma reservoirs in vis-
coelastic ice shells. Planet Sci J 3:170. https://doi.org/10.3847/PSJ/ac75bf
Lewis K, Klaasen K, Susca S, Oaida B, Larson M, Vanelli T, Murray A, Jones L, Thomas V , Frank L (2016)
Use of model payload for Europa mission development IEEE Aerospace Conference. In: 2016 IEEE
Aerospace Conference, pp 1–14. https://doi.org/10.1109/AERO.2016.7500708
Ligier N, Poulet F, Carter J, Brunetto R, Gourgeot F (2016) VLT/SINFONI observations of Europa: new
insights into the surface composition. Astron J 151:163. https://doi.org/10.3847/0004-6256/151/6/163
Lindzey LE (2015) In: Brief introd. Ice-penetrating radar. https://lindzey.github.io/blog/2015/07/27/a-brief-
introduction-to-ice-penetrating-radar/
Lindzey LE, Beem LH, Young DA, Quartini E, Blankenship DD, Lee C-K, Lee WS, Lee JI, Lee J (2020)
Aerogeophysical characterization of an active subglacial lake system in the David Glacier catchment,
Antarctica. Cryosphere 14:2217–2233. https://doi.org/10.5194/tc-14-2217-2020
Livingstone SJ, Li Y , Rutishauser A, Sanderson RJ, Winter K, Mikucki JA, Björnsson H, Bowling JS, Chu
W, Dow CF, Fricker HA, McMillan M, Ng FSL, Ross N, Siegert MJ, Siegfried M, Sole AJ (2022) Sub-
glacial lakes and their changing role in a warming climate. Nat Rev Earth Environ 3:106–124. https://
doi.org/10.1038/s43017-021-00246-9
Ludwinski J, Guman M, Johannesen J, Mitchell R, Staehle R (1998) The Europa Orbiter Mission Design
Lythe MB, Vaughan DG (2001) BEDMAP: a new ice thickness and subglacial topographic model of Antarc-
tica. J Geophys Res, Solid Earth 106:11335–11351. https://doi.org/10.1029/2000JB900449
MacGregor JA, Winebrenner DP, Conway H, Matsuoka K, Mayewski PA, Clow GD (2007) Modeling
englacial radar attenuation at Siple Dome, West Antarctica, using ice chemistry and temperature data. J
Geophys Res, Earth Surf 112:F3. https://doi.org/10.1029/2006JF000717
MacGregor JA, Li J, Paden JD, Catania GA, Clow GD, Fahnestock MA, Gogineni SP, Grimm RE, Morlighem
M, Nandi S, Seroussi H, Stillman DE (2015) Radar attenuation and temperature within the Greenland
Ice Sheet. J Geophys Res, Earth Surf 120:983–1008. https://doi.org/10.1002/2014JF003418
Machguth H, MacFerrin M, van As D, Box JE, Charalampidis C, Colgan W, Fausto RS, Meijer HA, Mosley-
Thompson E, van de Wal RS (2016) Greenland meltwater storage in ﬁrn limited by near-surface ice
formation. Nat Clim Change 6:390–393. https://doi.org/10.1038/nclimate2899
Manga M, Michaut C (2017) Formation of lenticulae on Europa by saucer-shaped sills. Icarus 286:261–269.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2016.10.009
Matsuoka K (2011) Pitfalls in radar diagnosis of ice-sheet bed conditions: Lessons from englacial attenuation
models. Geophys Res Lett 38:L05505. https://doi.org/10.1029/2010GL046205
Matsuoka T, Fujita S, Mae S (1996) Effect of temperature on dielectric properties of ice in the range 5–39
GHz. J Appl Phys 80:5884–5890. https://doi.org/10.1063/1.363582
Matsuoka K, MacGregor JA, Pattyn F (2012) Predicting radar attenuation within the Antarctic ice sheet. Earth
Planet Sci Lett 359:173–183. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2012.10.018
Mattei E, Pettinelli E, Lauro SE, Stillman DE, Cosciotti B, Marinangeli L, Tangari AC, Soldovieri F, Orosei R,
Caprarelli G (2022) Assessing the role of clay and salts on the origin of MARSIS basal bright reﬂections.
Earth Planet Sci Lett 579:117370. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2022.117370
Mazarico E, Barker MK, Neumann GA, Zuber MT, Smith DE (2014) Detection of the lunar body tide
by the Lunar Orbiter Laser Altimeter. Geophys Res Lett 41:2282–2288. https://doi.org/10.1002/
2013GL059085
Mazarico E, Buccino D, Castillo-Rogez J et al (2023) The Europa Clipper gravity and radio science investi-
gation. Space Sci Rev 219:30. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11214-023-00972-0


--- PAGE 84 ---
   51 Page84of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
McCarthy C, Cooper RF, Goldsby DL, Durham WB, Kirby SH (2011) Transient and steady state creep re-
sponse of ice I and magnesium sulfate hydrate eutectic aggregates. J Geophys Res, Planets 116:E04007.
https://doi.org/10.1029/2010JE003689
McCollom TM (1999) Methanogenesis as a potential source of chemical energy for primary biomass
production by autotrophic organisms in hydrothermal systems on Europa. J Geophys Res, Planets
104:30729–30742. https://doi.org/10.1029/1999JE001126
McGrath M, Hansen C, Hendrix A (2009) Observations of Europa’s tenuous atmosphere. In: Pappalardo RT,
McKinnon WB, Khurana KK (eds) Europa. University of Arizona Press, Tucson, pp 485–506. https://
doi.org/10.2307/j.ctt1xp3wdw.26
McKinnon WB (1999) Convective instability in Europa’s ﬂoating ice shell. Geophys Res Lett 26:951–954.
https://doi.org/10.1029/1999GL900125
McKinnon W (2005) Radar sounding of convecting ice shells in the presence of convection: application to
Europa, Ganymede, and Callisto. In: Workshop on Radar Investigations of Planetary and Terrestrial
Environments, pp 6039
Melosh HJ, Ekholm AG, Showman AP, Lorenz RD (2004) The temperature of Europa’s subsurface water
ocean. Icarus 168:498–502. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2003.11.026
Mercer JH (1978) West Antarctic ice sheet and CO2 greenhouse effect: a threat of disaster. Nature
271:321–325. https://doi.org/10.1038/271321a0
Michaut C, Manga M (2014) Domes, pits, and small chaos on Europa produced by water sills. J Geophys
Res, Planets 119:550–573. https://doi.org/10.1002/2013JE004558
Mitri G, Showman AP (2005) Convective–conductive transitions and sensitivity of a convecting ice shell to
perturbations in heat ﬂux and tidal-heating rate: implications for Europa. Icarus 177:447–460. https://
doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2005.03.019
Molaro JL, Choukroun M, Phillips CB, Phelps ES, Hodyss R, Mitchell KL, Lora JM, Meirion-Grifﬁth G
(2019) The microstructural evolution of water ice in the Solar System through sintering. J Geophys Res,
Planets 124:243–277. https://doi.org/10.1029/2018JE005773
Moore JC (2000) Models of radar absorption in europan ice. Icarus 147:292–300. https://doi.org/10.1006/
icar.2000.6425
Moore WB, Schubert G (2000) The tidal response of Europa. Icarus 147:317–319. https://doi.org/10.1006/
icar.2000.6460
Moore JC, Reid AP, Kipfstuhl J (1994) Microstructure and electrical properties of marine ice and its rela-
tionship to meteoric ice and sea ice. J Geophys Res, Oceans 99:5171–5180. https://doi.org/10.1029/
93JC02832
Moore JM, Asphaug E, Belton MJ, Bierhaus B, Breneman HH, Brooks SM, Chapman CR, Chuang FC,
Collins GC, Giese B (2001) Impact features on Europa: results of the Galileo Europa Mission (GEM).
Icarus 151:93–111. https://doi.org/10.1006/icar.2000.6558
Moore JM, Black G, Buratti B, Phillips CB, Spencer J, Sullivan R (2009) Surface properties, regolith, and
landscape degradation. In: Pappalardo RT, McKinnon WB, Khurana KK (eds) Europa. University of
Arizona Press, Tucson, pp 329–349. https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctt1xp3wdw.19
Mortimer CA, Sharp M, Wouters B (2016) Glacier surface temperatures in the Canadian High Arctic,
2000–15. J Glaciol 62:963–975. https://doi.org/10.1017/jog.2016.80
Mouginot J, Kofman W, Safaeinili A, Hérique A (2008) Correction of the ionospheric distortion on the
MARSIS surface sounding echoes. Planet Space Sci 56:917–926.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pss.2008.01.
010
Mouginot J, Kofman W, Safaeinili A, Grima C, Herique A, Plaut JJ (2009) MARSIS surface reﬂectivity of
the south residual cap of Mars. Icarus 201:454–459. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2009.01.009
Moussessian A, Jordan RL, Rodriguez E, Safaeinili A, Akins TL, Edelstein WN, Kim Y , Gogineni SP (2000)
A new coherent radar for ice sounding in Greenland. In: IGARSS 2000. IEEE 2000 international geo-
science and remote sensing symposium. Taking the pulse of the planet: the role of remote sensing in
managing the environment. Proceedings (Cat. No. 00CH37120), vol 2, pp 484–486. https://doi.org/10.
1109/IGARSS.2000.861604
National Research Council (2003) New frontiers in the Solar System: an integrated exploration strategy. The
National Academies Press, Washington DC. https://doi.org/10.17226/10432
National Research Council (2011) Vision and voyages for planetary science in the decade 2013-2022. The
National Academies Press, Washington DC. https://doi.org/10.17226/13117
Nimmo F, Gaidos E (2002) Strike-slip motion and double ridge formation on Europa. J Geophys Res, Planets
107:5-1. https://doi.org/10.1029/2000JE001476
Nimmo F, Giese B (2005) Thermal and topographic tests of Europa chaos formation models from Galileo
E15 observations. Icarus 177:327–340. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2004.10.034
Nimmo F, Manga M (2002) Causes, characteristics and consequences of convective diapirism on Europa.
Geophys Res Lett 29:24-1–24-4. https://doi.org/10.1029/2002GL015754


--- PAGE 85 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page85of91    51 
Nimmo F, Manga M (2009) Geodynamics of Europa’s icy shell. In: Pappalardo RT, McKinnon WB, Khu-
rana KK (eds) Europa. University of Arizona Press, Tucson, pp 381–404. https://doi.org/10.2307/j.
ctt1xp3wdw.22
Nimmo F, Schenk PM (2008) Stereo and Photoclinometric Comparisons and Topographic Roughness of
Europa. In: 39th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, LPI Contribution No. 1391, pp 1464
Nimmo F, Pappalardo RT, Giese B (2003) On the origins of band topography, Europa. Icarus 166:21–32.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2003.08.002
Oerter H, Kipfstuhl J, Determann J, Miller H, Wagenbach D, Minikin A, Graft W (1992) Evidence for basal
marine ice in the Filchner–Ronne Ice Shelf. Nature 358:399–401. https://doi.org/10.1038/358399a0
Ono T, Kumamoto A, Kasahara Y , Yamaguchi Y , Yamaji A, Kobayashi T, Oshigami S, Nakagawa H, Goto
Y , Hashimoto K, Omura Y , Imachi T, Matsumoto H, Oya H (2010) The Lunar Radar Sounder (LRS)
onboard the KAGUY A (SELENE) spacecraft. Space Sci Rev 154:145–192. https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11214-010-9673-8
Onoda GY , Liniger EG (1990) Random loose packings of uniform spheres and the dilatancy onset. Phys Rev
Lett 64:2727. https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevLett.64.2727
Orosei R, Jordan RL, Morgan DD, Cartacci M, Cicchetti A, Duru F, Gurnett DA, Heggy E, Kirchner DL,
Noschese R, Kofman W, Masdea A, Plaut JJ, Seu R, Watters TR, Picardi G (2015) Mars Advanced
Radar for Subsurface and Ionospheric Sounding (MARSIS) after nine years of operation: a summary.
Planet Space Sci 112:98–114. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pss.2014.07.010
Orosei R, Lauro SE, Pettinelli E, Cicchetti A, Coradini M, Cosciotti B, Di Paolo F, Flamini E, Mattei E,
Pajola M (2018) Radar evidence of subglacial liquid water on Mars. Science 361:490–493. https://doi.
org/10.1126/science.aar7268
Orosei R, Caprarelli G, Lauro S, Pettinelli E, Cartacci M, Cicchetti A, Cosciotti B, De Lorenzis A, De
Nunzio G, Mattei E (2022) Numerical simulations of radar echoes rule out basal CO2 ice deposits at
Ultimi Scopuli, Mars. Icarus 386:115163. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2022.115163
Pappalardo RT, Barr AC (2004) The origin of domes on Europa: the role of thermally induced compositional
diapirism. Geophys Res Lett 31:L01701. https://doi.org/10.1029/2003GL019202
Pappalardo RT, Head JW, Greeley R, Sullivan RJ, Pilcher C, Schubert G, Moore WB, Carr MH, Moore JM,
Belton MJS, Goldsby DL (1998) Geological evidence for solid-state convection in Europa’s ice shell.
Nature 391:365–368. https://doi.org/10.1038/34862
Pappalardo RT, Belton MJ, Breneman H, Carr M, Chapman CR, Collins G, Denk T, Fagents S, Geissler PE,
Giese B (1999) Does Europa have a subsurface ocean? Evaluation of the geological evidence. J Geophys
Res, Planets 104:24015–24055. https://doi.org/10.1029/1998JE000628
Pappalardo R, Vance S, Bagenal F, Bills B, Blaney D, Blankenship D, Brinckerhoff W, Connerney J, Hand
K, Hoehler TM (2013) Science potential from a Europa lander. Astrobiology 13:740–773. https://doi.
org/10.1089/ast.2013.1003
Pappalardo RT, Buratti BJ, Korth H et al (2024) Science overview of the Europa Clipper Mission. Space Sci
Rev 220
Peeples WJ, Sill WR, May TW, Ward SH, Phillips RJ, Jordan RL, Abbott EA, Killpack TJ (1978) Orbital
radar evidence for lunar subsurface layering in Maria Serenitatis and crisium. J Geophys Res, Solid
Earth 83:3459–3468. https://doi.org/10.1029/JB083iB07p03459
Peters M, Blankenship D, Holt J, Morse D, Young D (2005a) Airborne radar sounding: a survey of the
Thwaites Glacier Catchment of the Amundsen Sea Embayment, West Antarctica. In: AGU Fall Meeting,
pp U23C-06
Peters ME, Blankenship DD, Morse DL (2005b) Analysis techniques for coherent airborne radar sounding:
Application to West Antarctic ice streams. J Geophys Res, Solid Earth 110:B06303. https://doi.org/10.
1029/2004JB003222
Peters ME, Blankenship DD, Carter SP, Kempf SD, Young DA, Holt JW (2007a) Along-track focusing of
airborne radar sounding data from West Antarctica for improving basal reﬂection analysis and layer
detection. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 45:2725–2736.https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2007.897416
Peters ME, Blankenship DD, Smith DE, Holt JW, Kempf SD (2007b) The distribution and classiﬁcation
of bottom crevasses from radar sounding of a large tabular iceberg. IEEE Geosci Remote Sens Lett
4:142–146. https://doi.org/10.1109/LGRS.2006.887057
Peters LE, Anandakrishnan S, Holland CW, Horgan HJ, Blankenship DD, V oigt DE (2008) Seismic detection
of a subglacial lake near the South Pole, Antarctica. Geophys Res Lett 35:L23501. https://doi.org/10.
1029/2008GL035704
Peters ST, Schroeder DM, Romero-Wolf A (2020) Passive radio sounding to correct for Europa’s ionospheric
distortion of VHF signals. Planet Space Sci 187:104925. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pss.2020.104925
Peters ST, Roberts TM, Nessly K, Schroeder DM, Romero-Wolf A (2022) Revisiting the limits of spa-
tial coherence for passive radar sounding using radio-astronomical sources. In: IGARSS 2022 - 2022
IEEE international geoscience and remote sensing symposium, pp 3880–3883. https://doi.org/10.1109/
IGARSS46834.2022.9884673


--- PAGE 86 ---
   51 Page86of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
Pettinelli E, Cosciotti B, Di Paolo F, Lauro SE, Mattei E, Orosei R, Vannaroni G (2015) Dielectric properties
of Jovian satellite ice analogs for subsurface radar exploration: a review. Rev Geophys 53:593–641.
https://doi.org/10.1002/2014RG000463
Pettinelli E, Lauro SE, Cosciotti B, Mattei E, Di Paolo F, Vannaroni G (2016) Dielectric characterization
of ice/MgSO4·11H2O mixtures as Jovian icy moon crust analogues. Earth Planet Sci Lett 439:11–17.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2016.01.021
Phillips R, Adams G, Brown W Jr, Eggleton R, Jackson P, Jordan R, Peeples W, Porcello L, Ryu J, Schaber
G (1973) Preliminary results of the Apollo lunar sounder experiment
Phillips RJ, Davis BJ, Tanaka KL, Byrne S, Mellon MT, Putzig NE, Haberle RM, Kahre MA, Campbell BA,
Carter LM (2011) Massive CO2 ice deposits sequestered in the south polar layered deposits of Mars.
Science 332:838–841. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1203091
Phillips CB et al A Reconnaissance Strategy for Landing on Europa, based on Europa Clipper Data. Submitted
to Planet Sci J
Picardi G, Biccari D, Seu R, Plaut J, Johnson W, Jordan R, Safaeinili A, Gurnett D, Huff R, Orosei R (2004)
MARSIS: Mars advanced radar for subsurface and ionosphere sounding. In: Mars Express: the scientiﬁc
payload. pp 51–69
Picardi G, Plaut JJ, Biccari D, Bombaci O, Calabrese D, Cartacci M, Cicchetti A, Clifford SM, Edenhofer
P, Farrell WM (2005) Radar soundings of the subsurface of Mars. Science 310:1925–1928. https://doi.
org/10.1126/science.1122165
Plaut JJ, Picardi G, Safaeinili A, Ivanov AB, Milkovich SM, Cicchetti A, Kofman W, Mouginot J, Farrell
WM, Phillips RJ, Clifford SM, Frigeri A, Orosei R, Federico C, Williams IP, Gurnett DA, Nielsen E,
Hagfors T, Heggy E, Stofan ER, Plettemeier D, Watters TR, Leuschen CJ, Edenhofer P (2007) Subsur-
face radar sounding of the south polar layered deposits of Mars. Science 316:92–95. https://doi.org/10.
1126/science.1139672
Porcello LJ, Jordan RL, Zelenka JS, Adams GF, Phillips RJ, Brown WE, Ward SH, Jackson PL (1974) The
Apollo lunar sounder radar system. Proc IEEE 62:769–783. https://doi.org/10.1109/PROC.1974.9517
Priscu JC, Kalin J, Winans J, Campbell T, Siegfried MR, Skidmore M, Dore JE, Leventer A, Harwood DM,
Duling D, Zook R, Burnett J, Gibson D, Krula E, Mironov A, McManis J, Roberts G, Rosenheim BE,
Christner BC, Kasic K, Fricker HA, Lyons WB, Barker J, Bowling M, Collins B, Davis C, Gagnon A,
Gardner C, Gustafson C, Kim O-S, Li W, Michaud A, Patterson MO, Tranter M, Venturelli R, Vick-
Majors T, Elsworth C, TSS Team (2021) Scientiﬁc access into Mercer Subglacial Lake: scientiﬁc objec-
tives, drilling operations and initial observations. Ann Glaciol 62:340–352.https://doi.org/10.1017/aog.
2021.10
Prockter LM, Patterson GW (2009) Morphology and evolution of Europa’s ridges and bands. In: Pappalardo
RT, McKinnon WB, Khurana KK (eds) Europa. University of Arizona Press, Tucson, pp 237–258.
https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctt1xp3wdw.16
Prockter L, Schenk P (2005) Origin and evolution of Castalia Macula, an anomalous young depression on
Europa. Icarus 177:305–326. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2005.08.003
Putzig NE, Phillips RJ, Campbell BA, Holt JW, Plaut JJ, Carter LM, Egan AF, Bernardini F, Safaeinili A,
Seu R (2009) Subsurface structure of planum boreum from Mars reconnaissance orbiter shallow radar
soundings. Icarus 204:443–457. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2009.07.034
Quick LC, Hedman MM (2020) Characterizing deposits emplaced by cryovolcanic plumes on Europa. Icarus
343:113667. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2020.113667
Raju G, Xin W, Moore R (1990) Design, development, ﬁeld observations, and preliminary results of the
Coherent Antarctic Radar Depth Sounder (CARDS) of the University of Kansas, USA. J Glaciol
36:247–254. https://doi.org/10.3189/S0022143000009503
Reid HAS, Kontar EP (2021) Fine structure of type III solar radio bursts from Langmuir wave motion in
turbulent plasma. Nat Astron 5:796–804. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41550-021-01370-8
Rémy F, Parouty S (2009) Antarctic ice sheet and radar altimetry: a review. Remote Sens 1:1212–1239.
https://doi.org/10.3390/rs1041212
Rippin DM, Bingham RG, Jordan TA, Wright AP, Ross N, Corr HFJ, Ferraccioli F, Le Brocq AM, Rose
KC, Siegert MJ (2014) Basal roughness of the Institute and Möller Ice Streams, West Antarctica: pro-
cess determination and landscape interpretation. Geomorphology 214:139–147.https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.geomorph.2014.01.021
Robin GdQ, Doake C, Kohnen H, Crabtree R, Jordan S, Möller D (1983) Regime of the Filchner–Ronne ice
shelves, Antarctica. Nature 302:582–586. https://doi.org/10.1038/302582a0
Romero-Wolf A, Vance S, Maiwald F, Heggy E, Ries P, Liewer K (2015) A passive probe for subsurface
oceans and liquid water in Jupiter’s icy moons. Icarus 248:463–477. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.
2014.10.043
Roth L, Saur J, Retherford KD, Strobel DF, Feldman PD, McGrath MA, Nimmo F (2014) Transient water
vapor at Europa’s south pole. Science 343:171–174. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1247051


--- PAGE 87 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page87of91    51 
Rutishauser A, Grima C, Sharp M, Blankenship DD, Young DA, Cawkwell F, Dowdeswell JA (2016) Charac-
terizing near-surface ﬁrn using the scattered signal component of the glacier surface return from airborne
radio-echo sounding. Geophys Res Lett 43:12–502. https://doi.org/10.1002/2016GL071230
Rutishauser A, Blankenship DD, Sharp M, Skidmore ML, Greenbaum JS, Grima C, Schroeder DM,
Dowdeswell JA, Young DA (2018) Discovery of a hypersaline subglacial lake complex beneath De-
von Ice Cap, Canadian Arctic. Sci Adv 4:eaar4353. https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aar4353
Rutishauser A, Blankenship DD, Young DA, Wolfenbarger NS, Beem LH, Skidmore ML, Dubnick A, Crisc-
itiello AS (2022) Radar sounding survey over Devon Ice Cap indicates the potential for a diverse hy-
persaline subglacial hydrological environment. Cryosphere 16:379–395. https://doi.org/10.5194/tc-16-
379-2022
Safaeinili A, Kofman W, Nouvel J, Herique A, Jordan R (2003) Impact of Mars ionosphere on orbital radar
sounder operation and data processing. Planet Space Sci 51:505–515. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0032-
0633(03)00048-5
Safaeinili A, Kofman W, Mouginot J, Gim Y , Herique A, Ivanov AB, Plaut JJ, Picardi G (2007) Estimation
of the total electron content of the Martian ionosphere using radar sounder surface echoes. Geophys Res
Lett 34:L23204. https://doi.org/10.1029/2007GL032154
Sasaki S, Iijima Y , Tanaka K, Kato M, Hashimoto M, Mizutani H, Takizawa Y (2003) The SELENE mission:
goals and status. Adv Space Res 31:2335–2340. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0273-1177(03)00543-X
Saur J, Strobel D, Neubauer F (1998) Interaction of the Jovian magnetosphere with Europa: constraints on
the neutral atmosphere. J Geophys Res, Planets 103:19947–19962. https://doi.org/10.1029/97JE03556
Scanlan KM, Grima C, Steinbrügge G, Kempf SD, Young DA, Blankenship DD (2019) Geometric determi-
nation of ionospheric total electron content from dual frequency radar sounding measurements. Planet
Space Sci 178:104696. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pss.2019.07.010
Scanlan KM, Rutishauser A, Young DA, Blankenship DD (2020) Interferometric discrimination of cross-
track bed clutter in ice-penetrating radar sounding data. Ann Glaciol 61:68–73. https://doi.org/10.1017/
aog.2020.20
Scanlan KM, Young DA, Steinbrügge G, Kempf SD, Grima C, Blankenship DD (2021) Delay Doppler SAR
focusing and quantitative quality control of the radar for Europa assessment and sounding: ocean to near-
surface (REASON) sounding data product. IEEE J Sel Top Appl Earth Obs Remote Sens 14:4352–4369.
https://doi.org/10.1109/JSTARS.2021.3072276
Scanlan KM, Young DA, Blankenship DD (2022) Non-linear radar response to the radial structure of Europa
plume fallout deposits. Icarus 378:114935. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2022.114935
Schenk PM (2002) Thickness constraints on the icy shells of the Galilean satellites from a comparison of
crater shapes. Nature 417:419–421. https://doi.org/10.1038/417419a
Schenk PM, McKinnon WB (1991) Dark-ray and dark-ﬂoor craters on Ganymede, and the provenance
of large impactors in the Jovian system. Icarus 89:318–346. https://doi.org/10.1016/0019-1035(91)
90181-R
Schlegel R, Kulessa B, Murray T, Eisen O (2022) Towards a common terminology in radioglaciology. Ann
Glaciol 63:8–12. https://doi.org/10.1017/aog.2023.2
Schmidt BE, Blankenship DD, Patterson GW, Schenk PM (2011) Active formation of ‘chaos terrain’ over
shallow subsurface water on Europa. Nature 479:502–505. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature10608
Schroeder DM, Steinbrügge G (2021) Alternatives to liquid water beneath the south polar ice cap of Mars.
Geophys Res Lett 48:e2021GL095912. https://doi.org/10.1029/2021GL095912
Schroeder DM, Blankenship DD, Young DA (2013) Evidence for a water system transition beneath
Thwaites Glacier, West Antarctica. Proc Natl Acad Sci 110:12225–12228.https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.
1302828110
Schroeder DM, Blankenship DD, Raney RK, Grima C (2014) Estimating subglacial water geometry using
radar bed echo specularity: application to Thwaites Glacier, West Antarctica. IEEE Geosci Remote Sens
Lett 12:443–447. https://doi.org/10.1109/LGRS.2014.2337878
Schroeder DM, Grima C, Blankenship DD (2015) Evidence for variable grounding-zone and shear-margin
basal conditions across Thwaites Glacier, West Antarctica. Geophysics 81:W A35–W A43. https://doi.
org/10.1190/geo2015-0122.1
Schroeder DM, Romero-Wolf A, Carrer L, Grima C, Campbell BA, Kofman W, Bruzzone L, Blankenship
DD (2016) Assessing the potential for passive radio sounding of Europa and Ganymede with RIME and
REASON. Planet Space Sci 134:52–60. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pss.2016.10.007
Schroeder DM, Bingham RG, Blankenship DD, Christianson K, Eisen O, Flowers GE, Karlsson NB, Koutnik
MR, Paden JD, Siegert MJ (2020) Five decades of radioglaciology. Ann Glaciol 61:1–13. https://doi.
org/10.1017/aog.2020.11
Seu R, Biccari D, Orosei R, Lorenzoni LV , Phillips RJ, Marinangeli L, Picardi G, Masdea A, Zampolini E
(2004) SHARAD: the MRO 2005 shallow radar. Planet Space Sci 52:157–166. https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.pss.2003.08.024


--- PAGE 88 ---
   51 Page88of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
Seu R, Phillips RJ, Biccari D, Orosei R, Masdea A, Picardi G, Safaeinili A, Campbell BA, Plaut JJ, Marinan-
geli L, Smrekar SE, Nunes DC (2007) SHARAD sounding radar on the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter.
J Geophys Res 112:E05S05. https://doi.org/10.1029/2006JE002745
Shepard MK, Campbell BA (1999) Radar scattering from a self-afﬁne fractal surface: near-nadir regime.
Icarus 141:156–171. https://doi.org/10.1006/icar.1999.6141
Siegfried MR, Fricker HA (2021) Illuminating active subglacial lake processes with ICESat-2 laser altimetry.
Geophys Res Lett 48:e2020GL091089. https://doi.org/10.1029/2020GL091089
Sihvola AH (1999) Electromagnetic mixing formulas and applications. The Insitution of Engineering and
Technology (IET)
Sihvola A (2013) Homogenization principles and effect of mixing on dielectric behavior. Photonics Nanos-
truct Fundam Appl 11:364–373. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.photonics.2013.01.004
Singer KN, McKinnon WB, Schenk PM (2021) Pits, uplifts and small chaos features on Europa: morpho-
logic and morphometric evidence for intrusive upwelling and lower limits to ice shell thickness. Icarus
364:114465. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2021.114465
Singer KN, McKinnon WB, Schenk PM (2023) Thin ice lithospheres and high heat ﬂows on Europa from
large impact structure ring-graben. J Geophys Res, Planets 128:e2023JE007928. https://doi.org/10.
1029/2023JE007928
Smith IB, Putzig NE, Holt JW, Phillips RJ (2016) An ice age recorded in the polar deposits of Mars. Science
352:1075–1078. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.aad6968
Smith IB, Lalich DE, Rezza C, Horgan BHN, Whitten JL, Nerozzi S, Holt JW (2021) A solid interpretation
of bright radar reﬂectors under the Mars south polar ice. Geophys Res Lett 48:e2021GL093618.https://
doi.org/10.1029/2021GL093618
Sotin C, Head III JW Tobie G (2002) Europa: tidal heating of upwelling thermal plumes and the origin of
lenticulae and chaos melting. Geophys Res Lett 29:74-1. https://doi.org/10.1029/2001GL013844
Squyres SW, Reynolds RT, Cassen PM, Peale SJ (1983) Liquid water and active resurfacing on Europa.
Nature 301:225–226. https://doi.org/10.1038/301225a0
Steenson BO (1951) Radar methods for the exploration of glaciers (PhD thesis). California Institute of Tech-
nology
Steinbrügge G, Schroeder DM, Haynes MS, Hussmann H, Grima C, Blankenship DD (2018) Assessing the
potential for measuring Europa’s tidal Love number h
2 using radar sounder and topographic imager
data. Earth Planet Sci Lett 482:334–341. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.epsl.2017.11.028
Steinbrügge G, V oigt JRC, Schroeder DM, Stark A, Haynes MS, Scanlan KM, Hamilton CW, Young DA,
Hussmann H, Grima C, Blankenship DD (2020b) The surface roughness of Europa derived from Galileo
stereo images. Icarus 343:113669. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2020.113669
Steinbrügge G, V oigt JR, Wolfenbarger NS, Hamilton C, Soderlund K, Young D, Blankenship DD, Vance
SD, Schroeder DM (2020a) Brine migration and impact-induced cryovolcanism on Europa. Geophys
Res Lett 47:e2020GL090797. https://doi.org/10.1029/2020GL090797
Steinbrügge G, Haynes MS, Schroeder DM, Scanlan KM, Stark A, Young DA, Grima C, Kempf S, Ng G,
Buhl D (2021) Altimetry measurements from planetary radar sounders and application to SHARAD on
Mars. IEEE Trans Geosci Remote Sens 60:1–14. https://doi.org/10.1109/TGRS.2021.3134638
Stern W (1930) Principles, methods and results of electrodynamic thickness measurement of glacier ice. Z
Gletscherkunde 18:24
Stillman D, Grimm R, MacGregor J (2018) Chloride Salts Prevent Direct Determination of Europa’s Icy Shell
Thickness via Radar Sounding. In: 49th Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, LPI Contribution No.
2083, pp 1971
Stillman DE, Pettinelli E, Lauro SE, Mattei E, Caprarelli G, Cosciotti B, Primm KM, Orosei R (2022)
Partially-saturated brines within basal ice or sediments can explain the bright basal reﬂections in the
south polar layered deposits. J Geophys Res, Planets 127:e2022JE007398. https://doi.org/10.1029/
2022JE007398
Talalay P (2012) Russian researchers reach subglacial Lake V ostok in Antarctica. Adv Polar Sci 23:176–180
Thomas P, Tajeddine R, Tiscareno M, Burns J, Joseph J, Loredo T, Helfenstein P, Porco C (2016) Enceladus’s
measured physical libration requires a global subsurface ocean. Icarus 264:37–47. https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.icarus.2015.08.037
Thomas EC, Hodyss R, Vu TH, Johnson PV , Choukroun M (2017) Composition and evolution of frozen
chloride brines under the surface conditions of Europa. ACS Earth Space Chem 1:14–23. https://doi.
org/10.1021/acsearthspacechem.6b00003
Thyssen F (1988) Special aspects of the central part of Filchner-Ronne Ice Shelf, Antarctica. Ann Glaciol
11:173–179. https://doi.org/10.3189/S0260305500006509
Tomlinson TC, Hayne PO (2022) Composition and possible origins of dark crater ejecta on Europa. Icarus
385:115037. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.icarus.2022.115037


--- PAGE 89 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page89of91    51 
Trumbo SK, Brown ME, Hand KP (2019) Sodium chloride on the surface of Europa. Sci Adv 5:eaaw7123.
https://doi.org/10.1126/sciadv.aaw7123
Trumbo SK, Brown ME, Hand KP (2020) Endogenic and exogenic contributions to visible-wavelength spec-
tra of Europa’s trailing hemisphere. Astron J 160:282. https://doi.org/10.3847/1538-3881/abc34c
Trumbo SK, Becker TM, Brown ME, Denman WT, Molyneux P, Hendrix A, Retherford KD, Roth L, Alday J
(2022) A new UV spectral feature on Europa: conﬁrmation of NaCl in leading-hemisphere chaos terrain.
Planet Sci J 3:27. https://doi.org/10.3847/PSJ/ac4580
Tulaczyk S, Mikucki JA, Siegfried MR, Priscu JC, Barcheck CG, Beem LH, Behar A, Burnett J, Christner
BC, Fisher AT, Fricker HA, Mankoff KD, Powell RD, Rack F, Sampson D, Scherer RP, Schwartz SY ,
TWS Team (2014) WISSARD at Subglacial Lake Whillans, West Antarctica: scientiﬁc operations and
initial observations. Ann Glaciol 55:51–58. https://doi.org/10.3189/2014AoG65A009
Turchetti S, Dean K, Naylor S, Siegert M (2008) Accidents and opportunities: a history of the ra-
dio echo-sounding of Antarctica, 1958–79. Br J Hist Sci 41:417–444. https://doi.org/10.1017/
S0007087408000903
Turtle EP, McEwen AS, Patterson GW et al (2024) The Europa Imaging System (EIS) investigation. Space
Sci Rev 220
Ulaby F, Long D (2015) Microwave radar and radiometric remote sensing. Artech House
Vance SD, Craft KL, Shock E et al (2023) Investigating Europa’s habitability with the Europa Clipper. Space
Sci Rev 219:81. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11214-023-01025-2
Vaughan D, Sievers J, Doake C, Hinze H, Mantripp D, Pozdeev V , Sandhäger H, Schenke H-W, Solheim A,
Thyssen F (1995) Subglacial and seabed topography, ice thickness and water columm thickness in the
vicinity of Filchner-Ronne-Schelfseis, Antarctica. Polarforschung 64:75–88
Vaughan DG, Rivera A, Woodward J, Corr HFJ, Wendt J, Zamora R (2007) Topographic and hydrological
controls on Subglacial Lake Ellsworth, West Antarctica. Geophys Res Lett 34:L18501 https://doi.org/
10.1029/2007GL030769
Vilella K, Choblet G, Tsao W, Deschamps F (2020) Tidally heated convection and the occurrence of melting
in icy satellites: application to Europa. J Geophys Res, Planets 125:e2019JE006248. https://doi.org/10.
1029/2019JE006248
Vu TH, Hodyss R, Choukroun M, Johnson PV (2016) Chemistry of frozen sodium–
magnesium–sulfate–chloride brines: implications for surface expression of Europa’s ocean composition.
Astrophys J Lett 816:L26. https://doi.org/10.3847/2041-8205/816/2/L26
Wahr J, Zuber M, Smith D, Lunine J (2006) Tides on Europa, and the thickness of Europa’s icy shell. J
Geophys Res, Planets 111:E12005. https://doi.org/10.1029/2006JE002729
Waite AH, Schmidt SJ (1962) Gross errors in height indication from pulsed radar altimeters operating over
thick ice or snow. Proc IRE 50:1515–1520. https://doi.org/10.1109/JRPROC.1962.288195.
Walker ME, Rhoden AR (2022) Tidal heating at Europa using the multifrequency analysis of tidal heating
toolkit. Planet Sci J 3:149. https://doi.org/10.3847/PSJ/ac6df0
Warren SG (1984) Optical constants of ice from the ultraviolet to the microwave. Appl Opt 23:1206–1225.
https://doi.org/10.1029/2007JD009744
Weertman J (1974) Stability of the junction of an ice sheet and an ice shelf. J Glaciol 13:3–11. https://doi.
org/10.3189/S0022143000023327
Westlake JH, McNutt RL, Grey M et al (2023) The Plasma Instrument for Magnetic Sounding (PIMS) on the
Europa Clipper Mission. Space Sci Rev 291:62. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11214-023-01002-9
Wingham DJ, Siegert MJ, Shepherd A, Muir AS (2006) Rapid discharge connects Antarctic subglacial lakes.
Nature 440:1033–1036. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature04660
Wolfenbarger NS, Buffo JJ, Soderlund KM Blankenship DD (2022a) Ice shell structure and composition of
ocean worlds: insights from accreted ice on Earth. Astrobiology 22:937–961. https://doi.org/10.1089/
ast.2021.0044
Wolfenbarger NS, Fox-Powell MG, Buffo J, Soderlund KM, Blankenship DD (2022b) Compositional con-
trols on the distribution of brine in Europa’s ice shell. J Geophys Res, Planets 127:e2022JE007305.
https://doi.org/10.1029/2022JE007305
Wolfenbarger NS, Fox-Powell MG, Buffo J, Soderlund KM, Blankenship DD (2022c) Brine V olume Fraction
as a Habitability Metric for Europa’s ice shell. Geophys Res Lett 49:e2022GL100586. https://doi.org/
10.1029/2022GL100586
Wolfenbarger NS, Scanlan KM, Findlay D, Young DA, Schroeder DM, Blankenship DD (2023) Detecting
Fossil Brines within Europa’s Ice Shell Using Ice-Penetrating Radar. In: Brines Across the Solar System:
Ancient and Future Brines, LPI Contribution No. 2689, pp 2016
Woodward J, Smith AM, Ross N, Thoma M, Corr HFJ, King EC, King MA, Grosfeld K, Tranter M, Siegert
MJ (2010) Location for direct access to subglacial Lake Ellsworth: an assessment of geophysical data
and modeling. Geophys Res Lett 37:L11501. https://doi.org/10.1029/2010GL042884


--- PAGE 90 ---
   51 Page90of91 D.D.Blankenshipetal.
Zarka P, Cecconi B, Kurth WS (2004) Jupiter’s low-frequency radio spectrum from Cassini/Radio and Plasma
Wave Science (RPWS) absolute ﬂux density measurements. J Geophys Res Space Phys 109:A09S151.
https://doi.org/10.1029/2003JA010260
Zolotov MY , Kargel JS (2009) On the chemical composition of Europa’s icy shell, ocean, and underlying
rocks. In: Pappalardo RT, McKinnon WB, Khurana KK (eds) Europa. University of Arizona Press,
Tucson, pp 431–457. https://doi.org/10.2307/j.ctt1xp3wdw.18
Zolotov MY , Shock EL (2001) Composition and stability of salts on the surface of Europa and their oceanic
origin. J Geophys Res, Planets 106:32815–32827. https://doi.org/10.1029/2000JE001413
Zolotov MY , Shock EL (2004) A model for low-temperature biogeochemistry of sulfur, carbon, and iron on
Europa. J Geophys Res, Planets 109:E06003. https://doi.org/10.1029/2003JE002194
Publisher’sNote Springer Nature remains neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and
institutional afﬁliations.
AuthorsandAfﬁliations
DonaldD.Blankenship 1 ·AlinaMoussessian2 ·ElaineChapin2 ·DuncanA.Young 1 ·
G.WesleyPatterson 3 ·JeffreyJ.Plaut 2 ·AdamP.Freedman2 ·DustinM.Schroeder 4,5 ·
CyrilGrima1 ·GregorSteinbrügge2 ·KristaM.Soderlund 1 ·Trina Ray2 ·
ThomasG.Richter 1 ·LauraJones-Wilson2 ·NatalieS.Wolfenbarger 5 ·
KirkM.Scanlan 6 ·ChristopherGerekos1 ·KristianChan1,7 ·IlginSeker2 ·
MarkS.Haynes 2 ·AmyC.BarrMlinar 8 ·LorenzoBruzzone9 ·BruceA.Campbell 10 ·
Lynn M. Carter11 ·CharlesElachi12 ·YonggyuGim2 ·AlainHérique13 ·
HaukeHussmann14 ·WlodekKofman13,15 ·WilliamS.Kurth 16 ·
MarcoMastrogiuseppe17 ·WilliamB.McKinnon 18 ·JeffreyM.Moore 19 ·
FrancisNimmo20 ·CarolPaty21 ·DirkPlettemeier22 ·BritneyE.Schmidt 23,24 ·
MikhailY.Zolotov 25 ·PaulM.Schenk 26 ·SimonCollins2 ·HarryFigueroa2 ·
MarkFischman2 ·EricTardiff2 ·AndyBerkun2 ·MimiPaller2 ·JamesP.Hoffman 27 ·
AndyKurum28 ·GregoryA.Sadowy 2 ·KevinB.Wheeler 2 ·EmmanuelDecrossas2 ·
YasserHussein2 ·CurtisJin2 ·FrankBoldissar2 ·NeilChamberlain2 ·
BrendaHernandez2 ·ElhamMaghsoudi2 ·JonathanMihaly29 ·ShanaWorel2 ·
VikSingh2 ·KyungPak2 ·JordanTanabe2 ·RobertJohnson2 ·MohammadAshtijou2 ·
TafesseAlemu2 ·MichaelBurke2 ·BrianCustodero2 ·MichaelC.Tope 2 ·
DavidHawkins2 ·KimAaron2 ·GregoryT.Delory 30 ·PaulS.Turin 30 ·
DonaldL.Kirchner 16 ·KarthikSrinivasan2 ·JulieXie2 ·BradOrtloff2 ·IanTan2 ·
TimNoh2 ·DuaneClark2 ·VuDuong2 ·ShivaniJoshi2 ·JengLee2 ·ElvisMerida2 ·
RuzbehAkbar2 ·XueyangDuan2 ·InesFenni2 ·MauricioSanchez-Barbetty31 ·
ChaitaliParashare2 ·DuaneC.Howard 32 ·JulieNewman33 ·MarvinG.Cruz 2 ·
NeilJ.Barabas 34 ·AhmadrezaAmirahmadi2 ·BrendonPalmer2 ·RohitS.Gawande 2 ·
GraceMilroy2 ·RickRoberti2 ·FrankE.Leader 2 ·RichardD.West 2 ·JanMartin2 ·
VijayVenkatesh2 ·VirgilAdumitroaie2 ·ChristineRains2 ·CuongQuach2 ·
JordiE.Turner 3 ·ColleenM.O’Shea3 ·ScottD.Kempf 1 ·GregoryNg1 ·DillonP.Buhl 1 ·
TimothyJ.Urban 1
/LetterN.S. Wolfenbarger
nswolf@stanford.edu
1 Institute for Geophysics, University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78758, USA
2 Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91109, USA
3 Applied Physics Laboratory, Johns Hopkins University, Laurel, MD 20723, USA


--- PAGE 91 ---
RadarforEuropaAssessmentandSounding: OceantoNear-Surface... Page91of91    51 
4 Department of Electrical Engineering, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
5 Department of Geophysics, Stanford University, Stanford, CA 94305, USA
6 Geodesy & Earth Observation Division, DTU Space, Technical University of Denmark, 2800
Kongens Lyngby, Denmark
7 Department of Earth and Planetary Sciences, Jackson School of Geosciences, University of Texas
at Austin, Austin, TX 78712, USA
8 Planetary Science Institute, Tucson, AZ 85719, USA
9 University of Trento, Trento, Italy
10 Smithsonian Institution, Center for Earth & Planetary Studies, MRC 315, Washington, DC
20013-7012, USA
11 Lunar and Planetary Laboratory, University of Arizona, Tucson, AZ 85721, USA
12 California Institute of Technology, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
13 University Grenoble Alpes, CNRS, CNES, IPAG, 38000 Grenoble, France
14 Institute of Planetary Research, German Aerospace Center, Berlin, Germany
15 Centrum Badan Kosmicznych Polskiej Akademii Nauk (CBK PAN), Warsaw, Poland
16 Department of Physics and Astronomy, University of Iowa, Iowa City, IA 52242, USA
17 University of Rome “La Sapienza”, Rome, Italy
18 Washington University in St. Louis, St. Louis, MO 63130, USA
19 NASA Ames Research Center, Moffett Field, CA 94035, USA
20 Dept. Earth and Planetary Sciences, University of California, Santa Cruz, CA 95064, USA
21 Department of Earth Sciences, University of Oregon, Eugene, OR 97403, USA
22 Technische Universität Dresden, 01069 Dresden, Germany
23 Department of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY , USA
24 Department of Astronomy, Cornell University, Ithaca, NY , USA
25 School of Earth and Space Exploration, Arizona State University, Tempe, AZ 85287, USA
26 Lunar and Planetary Institute, Houston, TX 77058, USA
27 Kinemetrics Inc., Pasadena, CA 91107, USA
28 Planet, San Francisco, CA 94107, USA
29 Laboratory for Atmospheric and Space Physics, University of Colorado, Boulder, CO 80303, USA
30 Heliospace Corporation, Berkeley, CA 94710, USA
31 Tomorrow.io, Boston, MA 02210, USA
32 Center for Quantum Computing, Amazon Web Services, Pasadena, CA 91125, USA
33 The Boeing Company, El Segundo, CA 90245, USA
34 B&R Electronics, Reno, NV 89500, USA